Ovarian cancer is an aggressive disease, which, although associated with a high rate of recurrence, seems to benefit most from iterative
cytoreduction. Although the main patterns of its spreading are represented by peritoneal, lymphatic or hematogenous route, local recurrences
might also be seen. Whenever pelvic recurrence develops, complete resections based on the ultraradical principles applied in resections for
pelvic recurrences originating from cervical cancer, are useful. We present the case of a 56-year-old patient who was diagnosed with a
pelvic recurrence invading both the urinary bladder and the anterior rectal wall two years and a half after a surgery for stage IIIC ovarian
cancer. Ovarian cancer is an aggressive disease with high capacity of developing recurrences, the main patterns of its spreading being
represented by hematogenous, lymphatic and peritoneal route . Although not so frequent, isolated pelvic recurrences might also be seen; in
these cases, the principles of ultraradical pelvic surgery, which were first implemented in recurrent cervical cancer, seem to be
successfully applied . The case of a 56-year-old patient, who was previously diagnosed with stage IIIC ovarian cancer, is presented. At that
moment, a total hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy, omentectomy, parietal and pelvic peritonectomy were performed. Postoperatively, the
patient underwent six cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy based on platinum salts and taxanes. Two years and a half after the completion of
chemotherapy, the patient was investigated for pelvic pain and constipation; she was diagnosed with a pelvic recurrence invading both the
urinary bladder and the anterior wall of the rectum. A total exenteration with pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection was performed
(Fig. 1-3); the two ureters were exteriorized by end right sided cutaneous ureterostomy while the left colon was exteriorized in an end left
sided colostomy. The histopathological examination of the specimen (Fig. 4) revealed the presence of a moderately differentiated serous
epithelial ovarian cancer. The patient was discharged in the 11th postoperative day; at one year follow up, the patient was free of any
recurrent disease. Para-aortic lymph node dissection Large pelvic recurrence invading the rectum and the urinary bladder The final aspect
after tumor mobilization The specimen: recurrent ovarian tumor with rectal and urinary bladder invasion Solitary pelvic recurrence after
advanced stage epithelial ovarian cancer is not a very frequent condition . However, experience achieved in treating local pelvic
recurrences after cervical cancer was successfully implemented in treating pelvic recurrences originating from other tumors such as uterine
cancer, bladder cancer, rectal cancer or even ovarian cancer . Although initially when Brunschwig introduced it for the first time, pelvic
exenteration was associated with unacceptable rates of postoperative morbidity and mortality, in time, this procedure became the corner
stone in treating advanced pelvic malignancies . At that moment, Brunchwig and Barber also reported a series of 22 patients submitted to
pelvic exenteration for primary and recurrent ovarian tumors . A few years later, Hudson and Chir described a radical pelvic approach
involving radical oophorectomy associated with various resections of colic segments in order to provide complete macroscopic resection in
primary advanced ovarian cancer . Associated procedures employed to achieve complete cytoreduction included reverse
hysterocolposigmoidectomy, modified posterior exenteration or total exenteration; however, they referred especially to colic resection
during primary cytoreductive surgery . When it comes to advanced ovarian cancer, an important matter of debate is the recurrent character of
the disease which is responsible for the high number of relapses; this fact enables us to consider it rather a chronic disease characterized
by asymptomatic periods (quantified as disease free survival) followed by symptomatic moments when recurrences are diagnosed. For cases
initially diagnosed with advanced stage ovarian cancer, recurrence is expected to occur in 50 up to 90% of the cases, depending on
individual risk factors and the type of associated oncologic treatment. It has been demonstrated that almost half of the patients diagnosed
with recurrent ovarian tumors will associate a pelvic recurrence while almost 22% of the cases diagnosed with recurrent tumors will develop
a solitary pelvic recurrence . When it comes to pelvic recurrences after ovarian cancer necessitating pelvic exenteration, this is a quite
rare condition. In their study, Wilt et al. included 42 patients diagnosed with advanced pelvic malignancies submitted to pelvic
exenteration; however, a single patient was initially diagnosed with advanced stage epithelial ovarian cancer . In another study conducted
by Maggioni et al. involving 106 patients submitted to pelvic exenteration, only four of them reported pelvic recurrences originating from
ovarian tumors . Bristow et al. conducted a study on 56 patients submitted to secondary cytoreductive surgery in whom recto-sigmoidian
resections were associated; in eight cases, urinary bladder or distal ureter invasion were also performed. The high incidence of pelvic
recurrences involving both the rectal wall and the posterior wall of the urinary bladder were related to the local modifications of the
pelvic anatomy after performing a radical hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy. Once the uterus and the cervix were removed, the
anatomical relationships between the remnant organs changed, with a posterior displacement of the urinary bladder and an anteriorization of
the rectum, which would partially cover the vaginal stump. In time, once a pelvic recurrence developed, a local invasion of the remnant
pelvic viscera would produce much more easily when compared to cases which had not been submitted to previous surgical procedures and in
which the natural compartmental barriers still existed. In Bristowâ€™s study, the urinary resection resumed to partial cystectomy or distal
ureterectomy; secondarily, the continuity of the urinary tract was re-established by ureteroneocystostomy and psoas hitch, with or without a
Boari flap. When studying the postoperative complications, the same study reported an incidence of 5,4% for bowel fistulas or pelvic abscess
and 3,6% for postoperative pyelonephritis. Other encountered complications were not directly related to the extended pelvic resections and
included wound infections, pulmonary embolism, pneumonia or adult respiratory distress syndrome. Early postoperative death was encountered
in a single case and was related to a colic fistula, which necessitated early reoperation; however, death occurred due to septic syndrome .
In the study conducted by Nguyen et al., 76 patients with advanced pelvic malignancies were submitted to pelvic exenterations, 16 of them
being diagnosed with ovarian cancer. At the moment of performing the exenteration, 5 cases were diagnosed with primary advanced stage
ovarian cancer while the other 11 cases were diagnosed with pelvic recurrences after advanced ovarian cancer. The main surgical procedures
performed involved anterior exenteration (4 cases with primary tumors and 3 cases with pelvic recurrences), posterior exenteration (in all
cases posterior exenteration was performed for pelvic recurrences) and total pelvic exenterations (one case for primary ovarian cancer and 4
cases for pelvic recurrences). In two cases in which total exenteration was performed, radical resection was impossible to achieve; in all
the other cases, a complete R0 resection was performed. No postoperative death was reported . Although it is not a very frequent condition,
isolated pelvic recurrence after advanced stage ovarian cancer might be encountered; once a positive diagnosis is performed an aggressive
surgical approach in order to completely remove the tumor is justified. At this moment, a compilation between the principles of ultraradical
surgery implemented in advanced stage cervical cancer and the principles of maximal cytoreductive surgery, which were first postulated by
Meigs and later demonstrated by Grifiths, seem to offer the best therapeutical option in order to provide an adequate local control of the
disease. In the same time, the experience accumulated in ultraradical pelvic surgery for advanced stage or recurrent cervical cancer offers
the surgeon the possibility to perform a complete resection with minimum postoperative complications and to offer the patient a maximal
benefit in terms of survival.
