Vascular damage in the central hand knob area can mimic peripheral motor nerve deficits. We describe the case of a woman presenting with
apparent peripheral neuropathy. Brain magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography angiography revealed an infarct in the precentral
hand knob area, with significant stenosis in the right proximal middle cerebral artery trunk. Subsequent 3-Tesla magnetic resonance imaging
of the brain suggested cerebral angiitis. The patient experienced improved hand function following combined glucocorticoid and
cyclophosphamide treatment. Vascular damage in the hand knob area should be considered when evaluating peripheral motor nerve deficits in
the presence of normal nerve conduction velocities. The diagnosis of cerebral angiitis remains a major challenge for clinicians. Vascular
damage involving the central hand control network can produce focal weakness of the fingers, with ulnar presentation , and/or a
radial/medial distribution . Vascular pathology in the hand knob area should be considered when evaluating peripheral motor nerve deficits
in the presence of normal nerve conduction velocities. Here we report a case of subcortical infarct in the hand knob area, suggestive of
cerebral angiitis, that presented as apparent peripheral neuropathy. A 44-year-old, right-handed female presented with sudden hand motor
deficits in her left hand. There was no trauma to the arm, she used no medications and she had no vascular risk factors. Examination
revealed severe motor deficits of the left hand with extension of the three ulnar fingers and wrist, muscle atrophy in the first dorsal
interosseous muscle, and claw hand deformity without sensory deficits (Fig. 1a, b). According to the Medical Research Council scale
examination revealed grade 1 in the left wrist flexor, grade 4 in the left wrist extensor, grade 3 in the left fingers flexor and grade 4 in
the left fingers extensor. Adduction and abduction of the left fingers were also severely impaired (grade 3). Deep tendon reflexes were
mildly brisker ipsilateral to the affected hand. No Babinski sign was observed.Fig. 1Clinical photographs of the left hand and MRI of the
brain. a, b. Clinical photographs showing claw hand deformity due to infarct in the hand knob area. c. Axial diffusion- and, d, T2-weighted
MRI showing hyperintense signals (upper arrows on c) in the right precentral gyrus near the central sulcus (lower arrow on d), indicating an
infarct in the hand knob area (upper arrow on d) Clinical photographs of the left hand and MRI of the brain. a, b. Clinical photographs
showing claw hand deformity due to infarct in the hand knob area. c. Axial diffusion- and, d, T2-weighted MRI showing hyperintense signals
(upper arrows on c) in the right precentral gyrus near the central sulcus (lower arrow on d), indicating an infarct in the hand knob area
(upper arrow on d) Cervical computed tomography (CT) was unremarkable. Peripheral motor nerve conduction velocities were normal. Small,
discrete ischemic lesions appeared hyperintense on diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sequence (upper arrows on Fig. 1c).
The infarct was located in the right posterior part of the precentral hand knob area (upper arrow on 1d), near the central sulcus (lower
arrow on Fig. 1d). CT angiography showed significant stenosis in the right proximal middle cerebral artery (MCA) trunk. Transesophageal
echocardiogram and carotid ultrasound did not suggest an embolic source. Hypercoagulable screening and levels of markers specific to
systemic vasculitis were all normal. An embolism arising from the ipsilateral MCA stenosis was subsequently considered as the etiology of
the patient’s symptoms, and she received acetylsalicylic acid and clopidogrel for secondary stroke prevention. At the 2-month follow-up, the
patient complained of fatigue and progressive headaches. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was normal. Follow-up 3-Tesla MRI with gadolinium
contrast revealed focal wall enhancement in the right proximal MCA (Fig. 2), indicating cerebral angiitis. Multiple stenoses at the same
location were seen on digital subtraction angiography (DSA) (Fig. 3). Brain biopsy was not performed.Fig. 23-Tesla MRI of the brain.
T1-weighted (volumetric T1 turbo spin echo) 3-Tesla MRI of the brain with fat suppression and gadolinium contrast showing focal vessel wall
enhancement (arrow) of the right proximal middle cerebral arteryFig. 3Digital subtraction angiography of the brain. Multiple stenoses at the
internal carotid artery (ICA), middle cerebral artery, M1 segment, and anterior cerebral artery, A1 segment were seen on digital subtraction
angiography 3-Tesla MRI of the brain. T1-weighted (volumetric T1 turbo spin echo) 3-Tesla MRI of the brain with fat suppression and
gadolinium contrast showing focal vessel wall enhancement (arrow) of the right proximal middle cerebral artery Digital subtraction
angiography of the brain. Multiple stenoses at the internal carotid artery (ICA), middle cerebral artery, M1 segment, and anterior cerebral
artery, A1 segment were seen on digital subtraction angiography Cyclophosphamide infusions were administered with glucocorticoids over the
subsequent 15 weeks. Left-hand motor function improved, aside from her left fifth finger. It is known that pure motor nerve deficits
resulting from acute stroke can occur in the central hand control network , but also angular gyrus , the ventroposterolateral nuclei of
thalamus , internal capsule, corona radiate, pontine base and/or ventromedial medulla. It is hypothesised that discrete functional cortical
areas for each finger exist and are sequentially arranged , which means that finger movements are controlled by a highly distributed network
rather than by functionally and spatially discrete groups of neurons controlling each finger . This is also supported by the findings of one
study, in which none of the patients showed hand motor deficits limited strictly to one or a few fingers, but rather both radial and ulnar
sided hand motor deficits in varying degrees. The authors suggested this to be a characteristic form of finger motor deficits due to a
cortical lesion which is important to differentiate the clinical picture from lesions at other locations . Clinicoradiological signs
observed in our patient exhibiting pseudoperipheral neuropathy due to small subcortical infarction well support motor hand area in the motor
homunculus in the hand area. With a muscle hand atrophy, one should also look for compression of the ventral roots or of the anterior horns
of grey matter in the cervical regions. The muscle atrophy in such cases is due to a longstanding lower motor neuron lesion and is often
accompanied by weakness and fasciculation of the muscles innervated by the affected segments. No radiological evidence for cervical
compression was found in our patient. Functional MRI techniques suggest that the hand knob area, which controls hand motor function , is
located in the posterior part of the precentral gyrus, near the central sulcus . CT of the brain is often insufficient to diagnose the
majority of ischemic lesions in the hand knob area, mostly due to the small lesional size and the subcortical location. Diffusion-weighted
MRI is more sensitive to confirm the involvement of the precentral knob, and should be included as part of the standard evaluation. The
treatment of an infarct in the hand knob area is dependent of the suspected etiology, ranging from arterio-arterial embolism to
atherosclerotic infarcts . However, little is known about the underlying pathological mechanisms of this stroke entity . Diagnosis of
cerebral angiitis is challenging. Brain biopsy remains the gold standard ; however, positive DSA, MRI and cerebrospinal fluid findings are
sufficient to diagnose «probable» cerebral angiitis [13, 14]. Recent 3-Tesla MRI studies using increased magnetic field strengths have
identified distinct vasculitic patterns, with arterial wall thickening and enhancement in both proximal and distal small intracranial
vessels , that can remain stable for more than 12 months (median follow-up 13.5 months) . 3-Tesla MRI to detect arterial wall inflammation
may therefore become the favored criterion for diagnosing cerebral angiitis . Nevertheless, other causes of arterial wall enhancement (e.g.,
atherosclerosis, radiation vasculopathy, infection, and vasospasm) must be excluded, and studies in a wider range of disorders are required
to properly define the role of 3-Tesla MRI in the diagnostic process . It is also possible that our patient had pseudoperipheral palsy due
to cerebral angiitis, which was not detected by routine nerve conduction studies. Although long-term data are scarce, the early-phase
prognosis of similar cases is typically good , possibly due to the functions carried out by the damaged cortical area being resumed via the
recruitment of adjacent areas . The current case underlines that vascular pathology in the hand knob area can cause claw hand deformity,
leading the unwary clinician to suspect peripheral nerve problems. However, a subcortical hand knob infarct can imitate peripheral motor
nerve deficits, and is easily overlooked. To best of our knowledge, an infaction in the hand knob area associated with cerebral angiitis has
not been previously reported. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Computed tomography Digital
subtraction angiography Internal carotid artery Middle cerebral artery Magnetic resonance imaging Competing interests The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MJ is lead author, analysed and interpreted the case, conducted the literature
search and wrote the manuscript. AL performed literature research and drafted the manuscript. AHA was involved in the clinical care of the
patient, provided clinical information and commented on the manuscript. BN was involved in the imaging diagnostics of the patient, and
commented on the manuscript. EK was involved in the clinical care of the patient, provided clinical information and supervised the writing
of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
