Pyogenic sacroiliitis, a rare form of septic arthritis, occurs in patients following trauma, intravenous drug use, genitourinary infections
and pregnancy. Here we report a rare case where both acupuncture and pregnancy served as predisposing risk factors to the development of
this infection. A 33-year-old white woman received several sessions of acupuncture treatment during her gestation at the site of her
sacroiliac joint for sciatica; she developed biopsy-confirmed sacroiliitis with methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus during the
immediate postpartum period. The diagnosis, medical management and treatment course are described. Low back and pelvic pain are common
conditions during pregnancy and postpartum. Acupuncture is a common modality of medication-free treatment used by many patients. Recognition
of the potential complications of such therapies can lead to early diagnosis, accurate treatment, decreased morbidity and increased chances
for a successful outcome. Pyogenic sacroiliitis is a relatively rare form of septic arthritis, accounting for approximately 1% of all cases
of septic arthritis . Underlying conditions that may predispose to the development of this infection include trauma, intravenous drug use
and genitourinary infections. Pregnancy has also been cited as a potential risk factor for the development of pyogenic sacroiliitis . Here
we report a case of postpartum pyogenic sacroiliitis due to Staphylococcus aureus in which acupuncture may have provided an additional risk
factor for the development of this infection. A 33-year-old white woman with no significant past medical history developed right-sided
sciatica during the third trimester of her pregnancy for which she received acupuncture on several occasions. One of the puncture locations
was located on her back at the level of S2, 5cm to the right of midline, which corresponded to a position directly above her right
sacroiliac (SI) joint space. One week after her last acupuncture treatment, she had an uncomplicated vaginal delivery of a healthy infant
weighing 4.54kg (10lb). No epidural anesthesia was used. Five days postpartum, she developed rapidly worsening pain over her right buttock
to the extent that she was unable to walk and was admitted to our hospital. She denied fever, chills, illicit drug use or trauma to the
spine. Her temperature was 37.7 °C, heart rate 90/minute, and blood pressure 121/74mmHg on arrival. A physical examination revealed no
swelling or erythema at her hip or spine, but was notable for pain on passive flexion, hyperextension, abduction, adduction, and external
and internal rotation of her right hip. There were no other sites of inflammation and no cardiac murmur was heard. Her white blood cell
count (WBC) was 13.4, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 105, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 192.5. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
of her lumbosacral spine revealed significant fluid in her right SI joint associated with inflammatory changes extending through the
posterior margins of her right iliopsoas musculature and right paraspinal musculature (Fig. 1) in addition to osteomyelitis changes in the
adjacent iliac bone and sacrum. During this time, she developed a fever of 39 °C and she underwent a computed tomography (CT)-guided
aspiration of her SI joint. Both blood and joint fluid cultures grew methicillin-sensitive S. aureus. Urine analysis and urine cultures were
unremarkable and an echocardiogram did not reveal any valvular vegetations. She was treated with nafcillin administered intravenously; she
had rapid improvement and was discharged home for completion of a 6-week course of antibiotic therapy. Since completion of therapy there has
been no evidence of recurrence. Her SI joint tenderness had resolved and her hip pain had improved substantially; she was ambulating
independently and laboratory markers of inflammation had dramatically improved.Fig. 1Magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis showing
widening of the patient's right sacroiliac joint space with ‘increased’ fluid in the joint. Also visible are associated inflammatory changes
in the surrounding musculature, indicative of an inflammatory process occurring in the joint Magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis
showing widening of the patient's right sacroiliac joint space with ‘increased’ fluid in the joint. Also visible are associated inflammatory
changes in the surrounding musculature, indicative of an inflammatory process occurring in the joint There is a relatively high incidence of
septic sacroiliitis among pregnant women. Whereas septic sacroiliitis represents 1 to 1.5% of all septic arthritides, approximately 10% or
more of these infections occur in women during pregnancy or in the postpartum or post-abortion period. In a large series reported by
Vyskocil and colleagues, four of 41 (9.7%) women with sacroiliitis were pregnant . In another series, five of 23 women (22%) were in their
postpartum period. Almoujahed et al. reported cases of 15 women with pregnancy-associated pyogenic sacroiliitis of which six occurred during
pregnancy, and six and three, respectively, occurred within 3 weeks of delivery or abortion. The pathogenesis of septic sacroiliitis is
either by direct extension from a local infection or, more commonly, via hematogenous dissemination. Hematogenous development of joint or
bone infections tends to occur in joints that, as a result of some local process, are predisposed to infection, for example rheumatoid
arthritis. The local damage sets up a site of decreased resistance, a locus minoris resistantiae, in which circulating bacteria can settle
and begin to proliferate. The frequency of septic sacroiliitis in pregnant women suggests that during pregnancy the SI joint becomes a site
of decreased resistance. During the puerperal period there are local factors that may contribute to the predisposition of the SI joint
during pregnancy. Minor anatomic changes in the SI joint may occur due to pressures on the SI joint from growth of the gravid uterus or as a
result of the trauma of delivery . These changes may affect the microvasculature of the joint leading to microscopic areas of injury on the
joint surface making the periosteum more susceptible to bacterial invasion . Acupuncture and other forms of alternative or complementary
medicine have become increasingly popular in the USA. Acupuncture is considered relatively safe in pregnancy with few serious adverse
consequences . There is a single prior report of sacroiliitis after acupuncture which occurred in a 61-year-old man who had fallen several
weeks before the onset of symptoms . In that case, like in ours, the infecting organism was S. aureus. Since S. aureus can be present on the
skin, it is possible that in that case, as well as in our case, the organism was directly inoculated into the joint space by the acupuncture
needle. However, this is unlikely. The development of joint symptoms occurred more than 10 days after acupuncture. Direct inoculation of
bacteria into the joint space would have led to the more rapid development of symptoms. This delay in the appearance of local symptoms is
more supportive of hematogenous spread to a site of minor trauma: the SI joint. Presumably, local trauma resulted in a site of decreased
resistance in which bacteria settled during a bout of staphylococcal bacteremia. While infection of the SI joint is rare, lower back and
pelvic pain is very common during pregnancy and the postpartum period. Diagnosing pyogenic sacroiliitis during pregnancy requires a high
index of suspicion and requires radiologic procedures . MRI has been shown to be superior to CT, but microbiologic confirmation frequently
requires a CT-guided needle aspiration . It is important that the causative organism be identified. Although S. aureus is the most common
infecting organism, other Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas species may be involved. Since prolonged
antibiotic therapy is necessary, the optimal therapeutic approach is to identify the organism involved and determine its antimicrobial
susceptibility. This case represents a rare combination of risk factors in which both the patient’s underlying condition of pregnancy and
local trauma from acupuncture may have contributed to the development of a relatively rare infectious complication. The history of
acupuncture in a pregnant patient led to prompt recognition of this patient’s condition, early treatment and a successful outcome. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions VT and SC gathered pertinent case information and data and contributed to writing the manuscript. FM and GS served as
faculty advisors and were major contributors in making suggestions, editing, and revising the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. We thank Dr Charles Macri for his input on the manuscript.
