The Gerbode’s defect is a communication between the left ventricle and right atrium. It is usually congenital, but rarely is acquired, as a
complication of endocarditis, myocardial infarction, trauma, or after previous cardiac surgery. The acquired Gerbode defect with involvement
of the tricuspid valve acquired after bacterial endocarditis can be challenging to repair. We present a rare case of young woman, with
endocarditis of the tricuspid valve and acquired Gerbode defect without previous cardiac surgery. She underwent successful surgical closure
of the Gerbode defect and reconstruction of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve using a an autologous pericardial patch. A total of 20
other cases were reported with acquired Gerbode defect due to endocarditis in patients without previous cardiac surgery. Three other cases
presented acquired Gerbode defect due to myocardial infarction and two due to chest trauma. Another series of 62 patients presented acquired
Gerbode defect after previous cardiac surgery. Surgical treatment is always feasible with excellent outcome. However the percutanous
transcatheter closure remains an excellent option especially in high risk patients. The communication between the left ventricle and right
atrium was firstly reported in 1838 by Thurman . In 1957, Gerbode et al. reported the first 5 cases with such a heart defect undergoing
successful surgical repair. Such a defect is usually congenital, but rarely is acquired, as a complication of endocarditis , myocardial
infarction, blunt chest trauma or after previous cardiac surgery . This can be anatomically possible because the normal tricuspid valve is
more apically displaced than the mitral valve. Acquired Gerbode defects with large septal destructions and vegetations involving the
tricuspid valve can be challenging and might require complex patch repair. We present a case of our patient with this uncommon complication
of endocarditis, simulating severe pulmonary hypertension. A 40 year old lady from Kosovo, was referred to our hospital for severe pulmonary
arterial hypertension and a mass in right atrium suspected for vegetation. About one month before, she was admitted in another hospital and
received iv medication. The patient was febrile and the C-reactive protein, white cell count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were
elevated. Blood cultures demonstrated a methacilin sensitive Staphylococcus aureus growth. Transthoracic echocardiograhy demonstrated a
mobile, irregularly shaped, oscillating and highly mobile mass, located above the tricuspid valve septal leaflet (Fig. 1b). A clear jet
across a small defect between left ventricle and right atrium consistent with Gerbode type defect was identified. The direction of the
Doppler signal also leads to the true diagnosis (Fig. 1a). Cardiac magnetic resonance demonstrated a supravalvular flow associated with
infravalvular jet according to the type C acquired Gerbode defect (Fig. 1c and 1d). A normal lung scan excluded pulmonary embolism. The
tricuspid regurgitation was considered mild- to- moderate with estimated pulmonary arterial systolic pressure about 60-80 mmHg.Fig. 1a
Transesophageal echocardiography demonstrating the shunt between the left ventricle and right atrium. b Transthoracic echocardiography
demonstrating the vegetation inserted above the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. c Cardiac magnetic resonance demonstrating a
communication between the left ventricle and right atrium and right ventricle according to (d). C-type acquired Gerbode defect representing
a supravalvular combined with n infravalvular communication between the left and right side of the heart a Transesophageal echocardiography
demonstrating the shunt between the left ventricle and right atrium. b Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrating the vegetation inserted
above the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. c Cardiac magnetic resonance demonstrating a communication between the left ventricle and
right atrium and right ventricle according to (d). C-type acquired Gerbode defect representing a supravalvular combined with n infravalvular
communication between the left and right side of the heart The patients underwent surgery after 2 weeks of antiobiotic therapy. Through a
right atriotomy, large vegetation was attached to the septal leaflet and anterior leaflet of tricuspid valve was identified. On removal of
the vegetation, a defect was found communicating between the left ventricle and right atrium (Fig. 2a and 2b). This defect represented an
acquired Gerbode defect and was closed by two 5/0 pledgeted prolene sutures (Fig. 2c). Then the septal leaflet of tricuspid valve was
resected and was replaced with a trimmed autologous pericardial patch. Anteriorly the newly created septal leaflet was attached to the
anterior leaflet. Then, two synthetic chorda were employed (Fig. 2d). The hydraulic maneuver demonstrated trivial tricuspid valve
regurgitation (Fig. 2c). Then the right atrium was closed. After an uneventfully post-operative period, the patient was discharged home in
good clinical condition. Echocardiogram demonstrated trivial tricuspid valve regurgitation and no residual shunt. One year later the patient
was doing well. The transthoracic echocardiography at follow-up demonstrated a moderate tricuspid valve regurgitation and no residual
shunt.Fig. 2a Intraoperative view demonstrating the acquired Gerbode defect after removing the septal leaflet and part of the anterior
leaflet of the tricuspid valve. b A diagram representing the extension of the destructed valvular tissue. c Hydraulic maneuver after closure
of the acquired Gerbode defect and reconstruction of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. d A diagram demonstrating the final view of
the operation a Intraoperative view demonstrating the acquired Gerbode defect after removing the septal leaflet and part of the anterior
leaflet of the tricuspid valve. b A diagram representing the extension of the destructed valvular tissue. c Hydraulic maneuver after closure
of the acquired Gerbode defect and reconstruction of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. d A diagram demonstrating the final view of
the operation Gerbode described such a defect as a congenital atrioventricular shunt originating from the interventricular membranous septum
with regurgitation into the right atrium through a defect or cleft in the tricuspid valve leaflet . Less common is the acquired form of a
Gerbode defect, which is often associated with bacterial endocarditis , myocardial infarction , blunt chest trauma [28, 29] or post previous
cardiac surgical procedures [30, 31]. After a careful revision of the literature we found 25 other reported cases with acquired Gerbode
defect without previous cardiac surgery. In 22 of them, including our case, the cause was endocarditis. Only 4 patients were females. 7 out
21 cases presented endocarditis due to Staphylococcus aureus, usually involving the aortic valve extending below the aortic annulus onto the
upper part of the interventricular septum. Infective tissue destruction leads to a perforation of the septum creating a communication
between the left ventricle and the right atrium. However 8 out of 21 cases including our case presented tricuspid valve endocarditis causing
an acquired Gerbode defect (Table 1). In difference to the endocarditis of the left side, in the tricuspid valve endocarditis the
vegetations and destructed tissue are located in the right side so, it might be more than enough the closure of the communication only on
the right side, if healthy tissue is present as in our case. The mortality was almost 9 % in patients with endocarditis. Also the
postoperative complications such as renal failure was identified in 3 patients (13.6 %) and complete atrioventricular block in 3 patients
(13.6 %). The high incidence of the complete atrioventricularf block might be explained with the closed vicinity of the Gerbode defect with
the conduction system and atrioventricular node. Interestingely in none of the cases with Gerbode defect without prior cardiac surgery
undergoing surgical correction is reported recurrence of the communication between the left ventricle and right atrium or endocarditis
recurrence.Table 1Patients with acquired Gerbode defect without prior cardiac surgeryAuthor
(Ref)YearGender/AgeLocationBacteriaDiagnosisTreatmentOutcome1. Battin 1991Male/15nanaTTESurgerySurvived2. Saiki
1994Male/42MV,AVStreptococcus hemolyticusTTE,SurgerySurvived3. Katoh 1994Male/58TVnanaSurgerySurvived4. Elian 1995Male/64TVStaphylococcus
aureusTTE, TEE, CCSurgerySurvived5. Velebit 1995Male/ 30BAVStaphylococcus aureusTEE, CCSurgerySurvived(AVB)6. Winslow 1995Male/
30AVStaphylococcus aureusTTE, TEESurgerySurvived7. Michel 1996Male/52AVStreptococcus viridansTTE, TEEConservativeSurvived8. Alphonso
2003Male/ 63AVCulture negativeTTESurgerySurvived9. Raja 2006Male/47RAStaphylococcus aureusTTE, TEESurgerySurvived(RF)10. Fukui
2007Male/57TV, AV, MVnaTEESurgerySurvived11. Tatewaki 2008Female/7TV, AV, MVStaphylococcus aureusTEE, CTSurgerySurvived12. Inouel
2009Female/21AVCulture negativeTTE, TEESurgerySurvived13. Cortez-Dias 2009Male/59MVStaphylococcus aureusTTE, TEEConservativeDied(AVB, RF)14.
Mendoza 2009Female/52AVStreptococcus mutansTTE, CTSurgerySurvived15. Hori 2010Male/41BAVnaTTESurgerySurvived16. Matt 2010Male/35AVHemophilus
aphrophilusTTE,TEESurgerySurvived(AVB)17. Ota 2011Male/71AVStreptococcus pneumoniaTTE,TEESurgerySurvived18. Pillai 2011Male/12TVCulture
negativeTEESurgerySurvived19. Carpenter 2012Male/22TVStaphylococcus lugdunensisTEE, CTSurgerySurvived20. Hsu 2014Male/40BAVCardiobacterium
hominisTEE,SurgeryDied(RF)21. Prifti et al.2015Female/40TVStaphylococcus aureusTTE, TEESurgerySurvivedArea of myocardial infarction22. Hole
1995Male/63Inferior myocardial infarctionTTESurgerySurvived23. Jobic 1997Female/72Inferior myocardial infarctionTTE, TEESurgeryDied (RF)24.
Newman 1996Male/72Inferior myocardial infarction TraumaTTE, TEESurgeryDied25. Venkatesh 1996Male/16Blunt traumaTTE, TEESurgerySurvived26.
Selinger 1998Male/70Bullet, traumaTTE,TEE,CCSurgerySurvivedLegend: TTE Transthoracic echocardiography, TEE Transesophageal echocardiography,
CC Cardiac catheterization, CT Cardiac tomography, na not available, AV Aortic valve, BAV Bicuspid Aortic Valve, MV Mitral valve, TV
Tricuspid valve, RF Renal Failure, AVB Complete atrioventricular block Patients with acquired Gerbode defect without prior cardiac surgery
Legend: TTE Transthoracic echocardiography, TEE Transesophageal echocardiography, CC Cardiac catheterization, CT Cardiac tomography, na not
available, AV Aortic valve, BAV Bicuspid Aortic Valve, MV Mitral valve, TV Tricuspid valve, RF Renal Failure, AVB Complete atrioventricular
block Three other cases acquired Gerbode defect post myocardial infarction were found in the literature and all of them presented inferior
myocardial infarction. 2 of them died after surgery. Two other patients were found with acquired Gerbode defect due to blunt chest trauma or
bullet penetration. The overall mortality in 26 patients without prior cardiac surgery was 15.4 %. The postoperative hospital stay was less
than 2 weeks in the survived cases. Interestingely, acquired Gerbode defect after previous cardiac surgery was found in 62 other patients
(Table 2). 26 of them underwent surgical closure of the defect and 18 percutaneous closure employing different occlude devices. 11 patients
did not undergo any interventional procedure, probably due to small shunt or high operative risk. Most of the patients were undergone
previously aortic valve surgery or mitral valve surgery. However the mortality, in this group of patients despite all of them were redo
operations, was almost 3.2% extremely lower than patients undergoing first time cardiac surgical procedure (Table 1).Table 2Patients with
acquired Gerbode defect undergoing previous cardiac surgeryAuthorYearGenderAgeDiagnostic toolPrevious procedureTreatmentOutcome1. Katta et
al.1994Male54TTE,TEEEndomyocardial biopsyConservativeSurvived2. Dzwonczyk et al.1995Male25TTEASD repairnana3. Dzwonczyk et
al.1995Female72TTEAVR, VSD repairnana4. Fukui et al.2000Male53TEEMVR x 2SurgerySurvived5. Benisty et al.2000Male72TTE, TEEMVRSurgeryn.a.6.
Benisty et al.2000Male73TTE, TEEMVR x 3, AVRSurgeryn.a.7. Weinrich et al.2001Female58TEE, CCMVRx 2SurgerySurvived8. Wasserman et
al.2002Male78TTE, TEE,AVRSurgerySurvived9. Cabalka et al.2005Female70TTE, TEEMVR x 2PercutaneousSurvived10. Lorber et al.2006Female78TTE,
CCMVRPercutaneousSurvived11. Ramasubbu et al.2006Male41TEEAortic root reconstructionSurgerySurvived12. Ramasubbu et al.2006Female44TEEAortic
root reconstructionConservativeSurvived13. Trehan et al.2006Male22TTE, MRI, CCVSD + sinus valsalva repairPercutaneousSurvived14. Martinez et
al.2007Female70TTEMVRPercutaneousSurvived15. Martinez et al.2007Male67TTEAVRPercutaneousSurvived16. Uslu et
al.2007Male54TTEMVRSurgerySurvived17. Hilberath et al.2007Male68TEEAVR + endocarditisSurgerySurvived18. Frigg et al.2008Female77TEE,
CCAVRSurgerySurvived19. Moaref et al.2008Female51TEEMVRSurgeryna20. Aoyagi et al.2008Female71TTE, CCMVR, TV repairSurgerySurvived21. Rothman
et al.2008Male86TTE, CCMVRPercutaneousSurvived22. Hansalia et al.2009Female46TTEAVRSurgerySurvived23. Yared et al.2009Male60TTE, TTEAVR+
endocarditisnana24. Gorki et al.2009Female69naAVR + endocarditisnana25. Subramaniam et al.2009Male60TEE, CTAVRSurgerySurvived26. Amirghofran
et al.2009Female51TEEMVRSurgerySurvived27. Silbiger et al.2009Female30TTE, CCVSD repairConservativeSurvived28. Cheema et
al.2009Female31MRIVSD repairConservativeSurvived29. Can et al.2009Male72TTEAV nod ablationConservativeSurvived30. Can et
al.2009Male68AutopsyAV nod ablationnaDied31. Dadkhah et al.2009Female73TEETV repairConservativeSurvived32. Mohapatra et al2009Female22TEEMVR
(RF)SurgerySurvived33. Sun et al.2010nananaMVRSurgeryna34. Sun et al.2010nananaMVRnana35. Pursnani et al.2010Male78TTE,
TEEAVRSurgerySurvived36. Sharma et al.2011Male80TTEAV nod ablationConservativeSurvived37. Kumar et
al.2011Female59TEEAVRx2 + endocarditisSurgerySurvived38. Zhu et al.2012Baby6 monthsTTE, TEEASD, VSD repairPercutaneousSurvived39. Bochard-
Villanueva2012Male63TEE, CTAVR+ endocarditisSurgerySurvived40. Vallakati et al.2012Female53TTEAVRConservativeSurvived41. Elmistekawy et
al.2012Male59TEEAVRSurgerySurvived42. Dores et al.2012Male50TTE, TEEAVR, MVRSurgerySurvived43. Yurdakul et
al.2012Male68TEEAVRSurgerySurvived44. Mousavi et al.2012Female76TEE, MRIAVRConservativeSurvived45. Ozdogan et al.2012Female31TTE,
TEEMVRx2 + endocarditisSurgeryDied46. Anderson et al.2012nananaAVRnana47. Toprak et al.2013Male32TTE, TEEAVRConservativeSurvived48.
Notarangelo et al.2013n.a.69TTE, TEEMVRPercutaneousSurvived49. Sinisalo et al.2013Male75TTE, TEE, CCAVRPercutaneousSurvived50. Sinisalo et
al.2013Female23TEE, CCVSD repairPercutaneousSurvived51. Sinisalo et al.2013Male10TEE, CCASD, VSD repairPercutaneousSurvived52. Sinisalo et
al.2013Male8TEE, CCVSD repairPercutaneousSurvived53. Dangol et al.2013Male6 monthsTTE,TEE,CCToF repairPercutaneousSurvived54. Lee et
al.2013Male3 monthsTTE, CCASD, PDA, VSD repairPercutaneousSurvived55. Poulin et al.2013Female75TTE,TEEMVRPercutaneousSurvived56. Primus et
al.2013Female76TTE,TEEAVRConservativeSurvived57. Chaturvedi et al.2013Male62TTE, MRIAVRPercutaneousSurvived58. Tayama et al.2014Male75TTE,
CCMV and TV repairSurgerySurvived59. Hussain et al.2014Male45TTE, TEEAVRx2SurgerySurvived60. Chamsi-Pasha et al2014Male67TTE, TEEMVR,
TVRSurgerySurvived61. Taskesen et al.2014Male74TTE, TEEAVRx2PercutaneousSurvived62. Fanari et al2015Female50TTE,
CTAVRPercutaneousSurvivedPatients with acquired Gerbode defect undergoing previous cardiac surgeryLegend: TTE Transthoracic
echocardiography, TEE Transesophageal echocardiography, CC Cardiac catheterization, CT Cardiac tomography, MRI Magnetic resonance, na-not
available, AVR Aortic valve replacement, MVR Mitral valve replacement, TV Tricuspid valve, ASD Atrial septal defect, VSD Ventricular septal
defect, ToF Tetralogy of Fallot, PDA Patent ductus arteriosum Patients with acquired Gerbode defect undergoing previous cardiac surgery
Patients with acquired Gerbode defect undergoing previous cardiac surgery Legend: TTE Transthoracic echocardiography, TEE Transesophageal
echocardiography, CC Cardiac catheterization, CT Cardiac tomography, MRI Magnetic resonance, na-not available, AVR Aortic valve replacement,
MVR Mitral valve replacement, TV Tricuspid valve, ASD Atrial septal defect, VSD Ventricular septal defect, ToF Tetralogy of Fallot, PDA
Patent ductus arteriosum The diagnosis was made in most of the cases by transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography. It seems that
echocardiographic examination is the most frequently diagnostic tool employed in these patients. Identification of an actual communication
is often extremely difficult, so a careful and meticulous echocardiogram should be done in order to prevent echocardiographic
misinterpretation of this defect as pulmonary arterial hypertension. The large systolic pressure gradient between the left ventricle and the
right atrium would expectedly result in a high velocity systolic Doppler flow signal in right atrium and it can be sometimes mistakably
diagnosed as tricuspid regurgitant jet simulating pulmonary arterial hypertension. However cardiac catheterization, cardiac tomography or
magnetic resonance such as in our case offers valuable information. Interestingely our case after been diagnosed with Gerbode defect
underwent cardiac magnetic resonance which revealed a class C acquired Gerbode defect as previously described . Treatment of the acquired
Gerbode defect depends on symptoms, magnitude of shunt, flow volume, concomitant anatomic abnormalities and co-morbidities. Asymptomatic,
chronic, small defects can be managed conservatively. Percutaneous transcatheter closure techniques have been employed in almost 25% of
patients, mostly in high risk surgical candidates due to previous valve replacement, advanced age, anti-coagulation, and multiple
comorbidities. Advanced cardiac imaging techniques such as transesophageal echocardiography provide excellent images for guidance in device
sizing and deployment. The Amplatzer duct occluder device is a mainstay in treatment as it provides less radial force than the muscular
ventricular septal defect closure device causing fewer complications . In most of the cases with acquired Gerbode defect a simple direct
suture might be enough to close the defect such as in our case, although large Gerbode defect associated with partial or total distruction
of the tricuspid valve can be much more challenging. In such cases reconstruction or replacement of the tricuspid valve might be required.
Tatewaki et al. describe a pericardial patch closure with sutures from the ventricular side of the tricuspid valve through the leaflets.
Others reported a Dacron patch closure with septal leaflet reimplantation onto the patch [9, 12], an annuloplasty ring implantation, or
tricuspid valve replacement [5, 8, 9, 12]. Matt et al. presented a double plicated patch combining a defect closure and reconstruction of
the tricuspid valve annulus and septal leaflet. In our case we closed the defect from the right side using two single pledgeted prolene
suture and reconstruct the septal and anterior tricuspid valve leaflets using an autologous pericardial patch. This technique allowed us to
perform a complex right-sided defect repair with one patch that might be advantageous in an infective situation. Such a technique might
allow an extensive reconstruction of the tricuspid valve, if necessary. As conclusion, the acquired Gerbode defect a rare form of
intracardiac shunt, but its incidence has been increasing during the last decades. Increased numbers of invasive and repeat cardiovascular
procedures and infective endocarditis have led to this increase in acquired Gerbode defect. Surgical treatment is always feasible with
excellent outcome. However the percutanous transcatheter closure remains an excellent option especially in high risk patients. The acquired
Gerbode defect a rare form of intracardiac shunt, but its incidence has been increasing during the last decades. Increased numbers of
invasive and repeat cardiovascular procedures and infective endocarditis have led to this increase in acquired Gerbode defect. Surgical
treatment is always feasible with excellent outcome. However the percutanous transcatheter closure remains an excellent option especially in
high risk patients. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images.
A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Cardiothoracic Surgery. Competing interests
We declare that we do not have any competing or financial interests with this manuscript. Authors’ contribution FA and AD diagnosed the
patient and followed the patient postoperatively. EP and AB performed the surgery. All authors were involved on the literature review and
manuscript writing process. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information Edvin Prifti, MD, PhD, Fadil Ademaj,
MD, Arben Baboci, MD, Aurel Demiraj, MD.
