We report an unusual case of a 70-year-old male with history of hereditary spherocytosis (HS) and secondary paraspinal extramedullary
hematopoiesis with a concurrent follicular lymphoma. The lesion presented as a thoracic paraspinal mass of 9 cm, extending longitudinally
between T6 and T9 vertebral bodies. Incisional biopsy revealed that this mass included mature hematopoietic tissue compatible with
extramedullary hematopoiesis (EMH). The tissue also presented an extensive and diffuse infiltration by an atypical lymphoid population
composed predominantly by small cells. The immunohistochemical study revealed that the atypical lymphoid population had a germinal center
phenotype, consistent with the diffuse variant of follicular lymphoma (FL). The simultaneous presence of both EMH and FL in the same lesion
made the interpretation and the final diagnosis of this case difficult. The presence of EMH in this clinical context may eclipse the
diagnosis of the underlying lymphoproliferative neoplasm. The close association between the tumor cells and extramedullary hematopoietic
tissue in the absence of lymphadenopathies or other tissue involvement suggests a relationship of this tumor with the recently described
primary FL of the bone marrow. Extramedullary hematopoiesis (EMH) defined by the presence of hematopoietic tissue outside the bone marrow,
is a physiological phenomenon in the liver during the normal fetal development, but it is not normal after birth and must be considered a
pathological finding . EMH frequently affects the spleen and liver, usually forming small aggregates diffusely located in the parenchyma,
but it can also appear as a pseudotumoral mass, especially in atypical locations. This lesion can be symptomatic, presenting systemic and/or
local symptoms by compression of adjacent structures [1, 2]. Pathologic EMH is usually associated with other hematologic disorders affecting
the bone marrow or peripheral blood. The most frequent underlying diseases associated with EMH are some chronic myeloproliferative
neoplasms, chronic lymphoproliferative disorders, chronic hemolytic and inherited anemias, such as thalassemia, sickle cell disease or
hereditary spherocytosis (HS) [3, 4]. Hereditary spherocytosis is an inherited form of chronic hemolytic anemia secondary to deficit of some
of the cytoskeletal proteins associated with the erythrocyte membrane (Band 3, Ankyrin 1, 4.2 protein, alpha or beta Spectrin). The usual
findings in this disease are the presence of spherocytes in peripheral blood, signs of chronic hemolytic anemia and splenomegaly. Eventually
it could be associated with EMH in typical or atypical sites [3, 4]. The association between EMH and a concurrent lymphoproliferative
disorder is uncommon. The pseudotumoral presentation of EMH and the difficulty to recognize the underlying lymphoid neoplasm hinders the
diagnosis, therefore delaying the correct management of these patients. Here we present a patient with tumoral EMH associated with a
follicular lymphoma and a review the literature of this uncommon association. A 70 y-o male was admitted to the hospital because of a large
paravertebral tumoral mass. The patient had history of HS with mild clinical signs of hemolysis, such as pallor, jaundice and splenomegaly.
Laboratory tests were consistent with underlying chronic hemolysis, with hemoglobin levels around 10–11 g/dl, reticulocyte count of
approximately 5 %, ferritin levels between 376 and 470 ng/ml and transferrin saturation around 40 to 60 %. Routine abdominal ultrasonography
showed splenomegaly and biliary sludge in gallbladder. The patient was in treatment with folic acid. Due to an episode of a lower
respiratory infection, a CT scan and MRI were performed, evidencing a thoracic paraspinal tumoral mass of 9 × 4 × 2 cm, that extended along
T6 to T9 vertebral bodies and an inter-aorta-caval mass of 2.5 × 1.6 cm with similar characteristics. A PET-CT showed a pathological uptake
in both paravertebral tumors, but also revealed several lesions in right humerus, right femur and L3 vertebral body (Fig 1a). With these
findings, an incisional biopsy of the main paravertebral mass, a bone marrow trephine biopsy and a study of peripheral blood were
performed.Fig. 1PET scan imaging before and after four weeks of Rituximab. a PET/CT scan before immunotherapy. Note a large metabolically
active paravertebral mass of soft tissues adjacent to thoracic vertebral bodies T6 to T9 (arrow). A lesion in inter-aorto-caval mass is not
visible at this level. b PET scan after immunotherapy; partial uptake reduction of the main thoracic paravertebral mass (arrow) and the
inter-aorto-caval lesion (arrowhead) PET scan imaging before and after four weeks of Rituximab. a PET/CT scan before immunotherapy. Note a
large metabolically active paravertebral mass of soft tissues adjacent to thoracic vertebral bodies T6 to T9 (arrow). A lesion in inter-
aorto-caval mass is not visible at this level. b PET scan after immunotherapy; partial uptake reduction of the main thoracic paravertebral
mass (arrow) and the inter-aorto-caval lesion (arrowhead) Representative sections were routinely processed in buffered formalin and embedded
in paraffin, according to standard procedures. Biopsy of the main paraspinal mass revealed the presence of fragments of fibroconnective and
adipose tissue. In this tissue, we identified aggregates of mature hematopoietic tissue composed of megakaryocytes without atypical
features, a high proportion of erythroid elements forming erythroid islands and a small number of myeloid cells, with predominance of mature
forms. Dysplastic changes of megakaryocytes, aggregates of megakaryocytes, left shifted maturation or an increase in number of blast cells
were absent. These findings were consistent with extramedullary hematopoiesis. In other areas of the same sample, the tissue was diffusely
infiltrated by an atypical lymphoid population of mainly small cells with irregular, indented, hypercromatic nuclei and a few large
centroblast-like cells. Scattered mitotic figures were seen. The immunohistochemical stains (carried out with an automated immunostainer,
Dako Autostainer, Glostrup, Denmark) showed that the atypical cells had a B-cell phenotype with positivity for CD20 and CD79a and expressed
the germinal center markers CD10, BCL6 and LMO2, with coexpression of BCL2. There was a variable expression of follicular dendritic cell
markers (CD21 and CD23). The atypical cells were negative for CD5, CD30 and CD138. The proliferation index assessed by the nuclear
positivity for Ki-67 was low, about 20 %. A prominent component of mature T-cells was found intermingled with the atypical B-cells. These
findings were consistent with a diffuse infiltration by a follicular lymphoma (FL) (Fig. 2a–g). FISH for IGH/BCL2 (Abbott Molecular,
Illinois) rearrangement was carried out using dual color-dual fusion probes, and evidenced t(14;18) translocation in 15–20 % of cells
(Fig. 2h). The bone marrow biopsy showed an erythroid hyperplasia and a small paratrabecular infiltration by CD20 positive cells. Additional
markers were not contributory. Histologic changes suggestive of a chronic myeloproliferative neoplasm were absent.Fig. 2The biopsy of the
paravertebral mass showed aggregates of mature hematopoietic tissue, with erythroid islands and normal megakaryocytes consistent with EMH,
(a) H&E 40x, (b) H&E 200x. In other areas the tissue was diffusely infiltrated by an atypical lymphoid population of small cells with few
large centroblast-like cells, (c) H&E 100x, (d) H&E 400x. The cells are positive for (e) CD20, (f) BCL6 and (g) BCL2. h FISH shows an
IGH@/BCL2 translocation in some cells (yellow arrows), (dual color dual fusion probe, x400) The biopsy of the paravertebral mass showed
aggregates of mature hematopoietic tissue, with erythroid islands and normal megakaryocytes consistent with EMH, (a) H&E 40x, (b) H&E 200x.
In other areas the tissue was diffusely infiltrated by an atypical lymphoid population of small cells with few large centroblast-like cells,
(c) H&E 100x, (d) H&E 400x. The cells are positive for (e) CD20, (f) BCL6 and (g) BCL2. h FISH shows an IGH@/BCL2 translocation in some
cells (yellow arrows), (dual color dual fusion probe, x400) The study of peripheral blood showed some small spherical erythrocytes with
dense cytoplasm consistent with spherocytes. In addition, atypical centrocytic lymphoid cells with indented nuclei and mature chromatin were
also observed. Flow cytometry analysis identified a clonal population of B-cells (80 % of the total of B-cells) with expression of lambda
light chain, positive for CD19, CD20, CD22, CD79b, CD23, FMC7 and negative for CD5, CD10, CD38, and CD43. The patient began monotherapy
treatment with Rituximab (375 mg/m2) during four weeks. Six months after diagnosis, PET-CT showed reduction of the main paravertebral mass,
the inter-aorta-caval mass and the lesion in the humerus. A complete disappearance of the lesions in the femur and vertebrae (Fig. 1b) was
observed. Rituximab was restarted and a splenectomy was performed due to chronic hemolysis. The spleen did not show any evidence of
lymphoma. Six months after splenectomy, the patient is in good clinical standing. HS is a group of chronic inherited anemias in which the
characteristic feature is the presence of spherocytes, defined as small round erythrocytes with a higher concentration of hemoglobin. The
cause is a deficiency of proteins associated with the erythroid membrane that play a critical role in the capacity of cell deformability.
The proteins related to this disease are alpha-spectrin, beta-spectrin, ankyrin 1, protein 4.2 and band 3. This deficiency results in the
instability of the cellular membrane with subsequent formation of membrane vesicles and secondary reduction of the surface-to-volume ratio.
The spherocytes are retained in the red pulp of the spleen and part of these cells are destroyed, while the rest survive and return to the
peripheral blood with even more spherocytic features. The majority of patients present signs of hemolytic anemia, such as jaundice, pallor
and variable splenomegaly. Laboratory tests show mild anemia, presence of spherocytes and reticulocytes, higher mean corpuscular hemoglobin
concentration and increase of the osmotic fragility of the erythrocytes. The most frequent complication of this form of chronic hemolytic
anemia is the development of bilirubin gallstones. Less frequently the patient could present with skin lesions, myopathy, cardiovascular
disease, neuromuscular and SNC diseases [1, 2]. HS has been rarely described in association with neoplasms, including one diffuse large B
cell lymphoma , two acute lymphoblastic leukemias [6, 7], one splenic B-cell lymphoma , one schwannoma and one ganglioneuroma . The case of
HS and ganglioneuroma presented initially as a mass in the adrenal gland and a differential diagnosis with EMH was considered. EMH is
defined by the presence of hematopoietic tissue outside the bone marrow. This phenomenon could be normal or pathologic. Pathologic EMH is
usually associated with hematologic disorders affecting the bone marrow, peripheral blood and less frequently with vascular diseases or can
even appear without any other underlying disorder. Spleen and liver are typical sites for EMH [3, 4]. In the largest case series, Koch et
al. found 510 biopsies reporting EMH. In 483 patients, this lesion occurred in liver and spleen. In the rest of the patients, it appeared in
other sites, such as paraspinal region, lymph nodes, retroperitoneum, lung, pleura, genitourinary region and skin. The underlying associated
diseases were chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms, such as primary myelofibrosis, post polycythaemic myelofibrosis or chronic myeloid
leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, vascular malformations and inherited or chronic hemolytic anemias . Development of extramedullary
hematopoiesis in the clinical context of HS has been well documented. Paraspinal, thoracic and mediastinal regions are the most frequent
sites of involvement . Independent of the underlying disease, in some patients it may present as a pseudotumoral mass, mimicking a solid
tumor, and therefore a differential diagnosis with other neoplasms must be taken into account . A concurrent lymphoproliferative disorder
and EMH in the same lesion has been described in only four case reports . In one case there was no history of a previous lymphoid neoplasm,
and the development of the EMH probably was in the context of a hemorragic infarct secondary to a intravascular diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma in the blood vessels of the uvea. In the other three cases the lymphoproliferative disorder was previously known and the finding of
EMH and a concurrent lymphoma was made afterwords. The findings of these reports are summarized in Table 1. This infrequent association
between EMH and lymphoma may underestimate the presence of an underlying atypical lymphoid infiltrate, especially when extramedullary
hematopoiesis presents as a pseudotumoral lesion in patients with chronic anemia or myeloproliferative disorders.Table 1Clinical and
pathologic features of EMH with concurrent lymphoproliferative neoplasm in the literatureReferenceGenderAge (years)Anatomic site of
EMHPrevious history of lymphomaConcurrent lymphoid diseaseLast follow-upMusolino A. et al., 2007F36Central nervous systemYesAIDS-related
central nervous system lymphomaDead, 20 days after starting treatmentMudhar HS. et al., F81Eye (uvea)NoIntravascular diffuse large B-cell
lymphomaAlive, short follow-upGupta N. et al., NSNSLymph nodeYesT-cell leukemiaAlive, 4 months of follow-upForest F. et al., NS53Skin
(surgical scar)YesMarginal zone B-cell lymphomaAlive, 10 years of follow-upCurrent CaseM70Paraspinal mass (D6 – D9)NoFollicular lymphoma,
diffuse variantAlive, 6 months of follow-up F: female; M: male; NS: Not specified Clinical and pathologic features of EMH with concurrent
lymphoproliferative neoplasm in the literature F: female; M: male; NS: Not specified In the current case, the presence of a follicular
lymphoma with a predominantly diffuse pattern demonstrated in the EMH mass, in peripheral blood and in the bone marrow, is quite remarkable.
Our patient did not have lymphadenopathies or other evident lesions suspicious of FL by physical examination or imaging studies. This
situation is reminiscent of the recently described primary follicular lymphoma of the bone marrow in which the tumor cells were observed in
this location without evidence of lymphadenopathies or organomegalies, although three of the four patients also had circulating tumor cells
in peripheral blood as was observed in our patient . These four cases had a diffuse, nodular or interstitial pattern of bone marrow
infiltration, always with involvement of the paratrabecular area. The restricted expansion of lymphoma cells in the bone marrow in these
cases suggests that the tumor cells may have a particular tropism for the hematopoietic niche . The close association between the lymphoma
cells and the extramedullary hematopoiesis in our case may suggest a similar phenomenon. Three of the previously described patients were
asymptomatic, while the fourth one had history of bone pain without B symptoms. One patient died three months after the diagnosis without
treatment response and the rest were alive at least one year after, according to their clinical follow-up. The lack of symptoms related to
the lymphoma in our patient is also similar to those patients with primary FL of the bone marrow . We present the case of a patient with
hereditary spherocytosis and secondary development of paraspinal extramedullary hematopoiesis and concurrent primary follicular lymphoma.
The diagnosis of this association is rare and the presence of tumoral EMH may underestimate the existence of an underlying lymphoma. The
close association between the tumor cells and extramedullary hematopoiteic tissue suggests a relationship of this tumor with the recently
described primary FL of the bone marrow. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Hereditary spherocytosis
Extramedullary hematopoiesis Follicular lymphoma Ricardo Molina-Urra and Daniel Martinez contributed equally to this work. Competing
interest The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contribution RM and DM wrote the manuscript. RM, DM, AS and EC
conducted the pathological review. AC performed FISH analyses. XS performed PET-CT analyses. BN performed clinical analyses. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by Generalitat de Catalunya AGAUR 2014-SGR-795 (E.C.). E.C. is a researcher
of the Academia “Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats” (ICREA).
