Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 77 Final Diagnosis: Neuroendocrine carcinoma of the kidney and bladder
Symptoms: Right lumbar pain Medication: None Clinical Procedure: CT • needele biopsy of renal tumor • transyrethral resection of bladder
tumor Specialty: Urology Rare disease Neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs) of the urological organs are observed occasionally, although
simultaneous development in the kidney and blabber has not been reported. We report a case of a metastatic NEC of the kidney and bladder in
a 77-year-old woman who underwent renal biopsy and transurethral resection of the bladder tumor. Pathological examination revealed NEC in
the kidney and the bladder samples. Immunohistochemical examination revealed strongly positive staining for synaptophysin, chromogranin A,
and CD56, and focally positive staining for cytokeratin AE 1/3 and Cam 5.2. Fluorescence in situ hybridization confirmed the increased
chromosome 3 copy number, and loss of hybridization in 3q21, 5q22–23, 10q26, and 13q14 was detected when the tumor samples were compared
with normal samples. This is a rare case of NEC-specific genetic abnormalities in a kidney-derived tumor, and is the first report to
identify kidney-derived NEC that metastasized to the bladder via the urinary tract. Neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs), including small cell
carcinomas, are poorly differentiated epithelial neoplasms that exhibit neuroendocrine differentiation and often occur in the mucous
membranes of the organs (e.g., bronchi and gastrointestinal tract ) where neuroendocrine cells typically reside. The pathological features
of NEC are uniform small cells with scant cytoplasm, powdery chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleoli. However, it is rare that NEC arises in
the kidney or bladder as a primary lesion, although these tumors often have characteristic immunohistochemical features and
genetic/chromosomal alternations that are unique from NECs that arise from respiratory lesions . In this case, we experienced a very rare
metastatic NEC that spontaneously arose in the kidney and bladder, and we investigated the morphological, immunohistochemical, and genetic
backgrounds of this case, considering the available literature. A 77-year-old woman with no other personal or familial medical history
presented with a 1-month history of right lumbar pain. Physical examination revealed a tender mass in the deep right hypochondrium. The
urinalysis results were unremarkable, with normal soluble IL-2 receptor levels. However, we detected a light inflammatory reaction
(C-reactive protein: 3.77 mg/dL), extremely high lactate dehydrogenase (LDH: 1474 IU/L) and neuron-specific enolase (NSE: 1600 ng/mL,
normal: ≤16.3 ng/mL), and slightly elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (6.3 mg/mL, normal: ≤5.0 mg/mL) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (39.5
U/mL, normal: ≤37.0 U/mL) levels. Class V urine cytology was detected, and computed tomography revealed a right renal mass without distinct
border in the kidney, which overlapped the para-aorta lymph nodes, with right hydronephrosis and hydroureter and a broad-based non-papillary
submucosal tumor (Figure 1), with suspected multiple metastatic lesions on the left infraclavicular lymph node, left humerus, right 4th rib,
and right femur. Therefore, needle biopsy of the right renal tumor and transurethral resection of the bladder tumor were performed.
Histological examination of the tumor with hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed a diffuse tumor composed of small round cells with a high
nucleus-cytoplasm ratio in both the renal and bladder specimens, and extensive necrosis (Figure 2). In addition, the differentiation
tendencies (e.g., ductal formation or cornification) were also evaluated, and immunohistochemistry revealed focal staining of cytokeratins
as epithelial markers, as well as strong positive staining for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56 as neuroendocrine markers (Table 1).
Therefore, NEC of the right kidney and bladder was diagnosed. To confirm the diagnosis, transmission electron microscopy was performed (data
not shown), and small round cells were observed, which had poor cytoplasm, a high nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, and high-density endocrine
granules (approximately 50–100 nm) in the cytoplasm. In addition, fluorescence in situ hybridization was used to compare the chromosome 3
copy number using CEP3 probes, and the results indicated 3 signals per nucleus in 58.5% of the tumor cells (Figure 3). To evaluate the loss
of heterozygosity (LOH), 12 regions, which has been reported in small cell carcinomas or endocrine tumors , were analyzed using GeneMapper
software (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and 4 loci (D3S1768, D5S346, D10S169, and D13S153 for 3q21, 5q22–23, 10q26, and 13q14,
respectively) of LOH were determined (Figure 4). For the initial 2 weeks to perform the renal biopsy, transurethral resection and
pathological diagnosis, this case indicated sudden increase in LDH to 13 060 U/L. Based on the National Comprehensive Cancer Network
guidelines, we initiated a combination of carboplatin and etoposide, which was followed by the therapy that was provided for the
unresectable NEC. After 2 courses, a decrease in the number of metastatic foci (including in the kidney), NSE (25.1 ng/mL), and LDH (1,366
U/L) was observed. However, the recovery from myelosuppression was undesirable and medication of the zoledronic acid for the exacerbation of
hypercalcemia and of the opioid for the cancer pain were induced before the third course, and the patient did not expect further aggressive
treatment and moved to a hospital specializing in palliative care. Thereafter, her physical state worsened immediately, and she subsequently
died of the cancer the next month. Urinary tract-derived NEC is rarely reported , and this is the first report of simultaneous NEC in the
kidney and bladder. On the basis of the pathological and genetic characterization, we investigated the origin of the metastatic NEC.
Shurtleff et al. reviewed the characteristics of kidney-derived NEC . Although the pathologic origin of primary renal NEC is unclear, it is
thought to be an ancestor cell incorporated into the renal parenchyma during organ formation. Small nests of paraganglion cells in the
kidney hilum may be the origin of neuroendocrine tumors . In addition, neuroendocrine differentiation is rarely observed in microcystic
urothelial cancer of the renal pelvis. Furthermore, renal NEC from metaplasia of the neuroendocrine cells in the stroma of the renal pelvis
mucosal membrane has been reported . In all the reported cases, primary renal NEC was generated in the renal pelvis area, and this condition
does not contradict our case. In contrast, the International Agency for Research Cancer describes bladder NECs as small cell bladder cancers
, and has commented that almost all urinary tract small cell carcinomas arise in the urinary bladder. Therefore, it is difficult to
determine the tumor’s origin morphologically, as bladder NECs cannot be clearly differentiated from renal NECs by using
immunohistochemistry. Recently, Neşe et al. reported high expression of somatostatin receptor type 2A (SSTR-2A) in small cell carcinomas of
the bladder and that SSTR-2A expression was correlated with survival as a poor prognostic factor. Jiang Y et al. investigated
clinicopathological data from 17 NEC of the bladder cases and concluded that immunohistochemical markers such as CD56, Syn, CgA, and CKpan
could be helpful in determining the diagnosis and differential diagnosis. However, it is thought that the immunohistochemistry for such
markers cannot identify the origin of NECs generated urinary tract (kidney or bladder). NECs that are generated in the urological organs
often have unstable hereditary and genetic variations in contrast to pulmonary carcinoid tumors. In cytogenetic studies of pulmonary
carcinoid tumors, chromosome 3 abnormalities have not been detected , while abnormal chromosome 3 copy numbers and LOH in 3p are considered
characteristic of kidney-derived tumors . However, it has been suggested that a bladder NEC is a tumor with unstable heredity and several
typically cytogenetic changes. The most frequently detected changes in bladder NECs are deletions in 10q, 4q, 5q, and 13q, as well as
insertions in 8q, 5p, 6p, and 20q. In addition, large amplifications have been observed at 1p22-32, 3q26.3, 8q24 (including c-Myc), and
12q14-21 (including MDM2), which may potentially pinpoint the location of the activated oncogenes . In the present case, LOH was detected at
3q21 (D3S1768, characteristic of kidney NECs) , 5q22-q23 (D5S346, characteristic of several urothelial and rectal tumors) , 10q26 (D10S169,
characteristic of invasive bladder cancers and thyroidal tumors) , and 13q14.2 (D13S153, characteristic of some prostate cancers and skin
squamous cell carcinomas) . This is the first reported case of simultaneous occurrence of renal and bladder NECs, and further genetic
examination determined that this tumor was a kidney-derived NEC metastasized to the bladder via the urinary tract. This is a rare case of
neuroendocrine carcinoma with specific genetic abnormalities in a kidney-derived tumor, and is the first report to identify a kidney-derived
NEC that metastasized to the bladder via the urinary tract. We thank Ms. N. Kasuga, Ms. M. Noda, Ms. K. Ichikawa, and Ms. R. Morikane for
their experimental assistance with the LOH analysis and morphological examinations. Conflicts of interest None. neuroendocrine carcinoma;
lactate dehydrogenase; neuron-specific enolase; loss of hybridization Computed tomography images of the neuroendocrine carcinoma in the
kidney and bladder. (A) Depicts a right renal mass without a distinct border, with visible hydronephrosis (white arrow) and para-aorta lymph
node swelling (asterisk). (B) Depicts a bladder tumor (black arrow) with hydroureter (white arrow). Pathological findings from the tumor
regions of the kidney and bladder. Hematoxylin-eosin staining. Magnification: 20× (A) and 400× (B). Fluorescencein situ hybridization using
the CEP3 probe to detect chromosome 3 in the tumor region. Arrows indicate CEP3 probe signals, and trisomy of chromosome 3 was detected.
Representative results of detection of loss of hybridization (LOH) in the neuroendocrine carcinoma of the bladder. The 4 loci (D3S1768,
D5S346, D10S169, and D13S153 for 3q21, 5q22–23, 10q26, and 13q14, respectively) of LOH were determined. Arrows indicate the alleles that
exhibited LOH in the tumor samples. Immunohistochemical characteristics of the neuroendocrine carcinoma of the kidney and bladder. CK –
cytokeratin; CD – cluster of differentiation; TdT – terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase; NCAM – neural cell adhesion molecule; NSE –
neuron-specific enolase; TTF-1 – thyroid transcription factor-1; SMA – smooth muscle actin; WT-1 – Wilms’ tumor protein 1.
