Here, we report the complete resolution of a calcifying cystic odontogenic tumor (CCOT) in the right mandible after marsupialization in an
8-year-old girl with a mixed dentition. Clinical, radiographic, and histopathological findings showed a simple cystic variant of CCOT in the
region of the deciduous second molar, with dislocation of the permanent second premolar tooth germ. Initial treatment involved
marsupialization, including extraction of the involved deciduous tooth, incision of pathological tissue, and creation of a window in the
extraction socket. The crown of the dislocated second premolar was exposed at the base of the cystic cavity after marsupialization. One year
and nine months later, complete bone healing and spontaneous eruption of the second premolar were observed, providing evidence of the bone
regeneration capacity and tooth germ eruption potential in children. No recurrence was observed after 7 years. The findings from this case
suggest that marsupialization can be successfully applied for the treatment of CCOT in children with a mixed dentition. The 2005 World
Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Odontogenic Tumors renamed calcifying odontogenic cysts (COCs) as calcifying cystic odontogenic
tumors (CCOTs) . The clinicopathological features of ghost cell odontogenic tumors (GCOTs), including CCOTs, dentinogenic ghost cell tumors
(DGCTs), and ghost cell odontogenic carcinomas (GCOCs), were also defined. CCOTs can be further classified into the following four variants:
simple cystic, odontoma-associated, ameloblastomatous proliferating, and CCOT associated with a benign odontogenic tumor other than odontoma
. CCOTs are generally benign, and the recommended treatment involves simple enucleation and curettage, regardless of the variant [2, 3].
However, enucleation and curettage may damage adjacent anatomical structures. Therefore, more conservative treatments such as
marsupialization or decompression should be considered before enucleation and curettage, particularly in children. A few reports have
demonstrated successful healing after marsupialization or decompression of CCOTs [4, 5]. Here we present the second case, to the best of our
knowledge, of CCOT in an 8-year-old girl with a mixed dentition that was successfully treated by marsupialization only, which resulted in
excellent bone healing and facilitated physiological eruption of a dislocated permanent tooth. An 8-year-old healthy girl was referred to
our hospital by her general dentist who suspected the presence of an odontogenic cystic lesion in the region of the deciduous mandibular
right second molar. Intraoral examination during her first visit revealed buccal bone expansion in the mandibular right molar region.
Panoramic and periapical radiographs revealed a unilocular cystic radiolucency around the roots of the deciduous second molar (Fig. 1a, b).
In addition, the tooth germ of the second premolar was involved and medially displaced. Computed tomography showed small high-density spots
within a well-defined radiolucency, with buccal and lingual bone expansion (Fig. 1c, d). No cortical bone distraction was observed. These
findings strongly suggested CCOT, although a dentigerous cyst was also a possibility.Fig. 1Preoperative radiographs. a Panoramic radiograph
showing a large unilocular radiolucent lesion with a dislocated permanent premolar tooth germ in the right mandible. b Periapical radiograph
showing partially absorbed roots and infection in the involved deciduous second molar. c Horizontal computed tomography view of the lesion
showing small, high-density spots within a well-defined radiolucent region, with buccal and lingual cortical expansion. d Sagittal computed
tomography view Preoperative radiographs. a Panoramic radiograph showing a large unilocular radiolucent lesion with a dislocated permanent
premolar tooth germ in the right mandible. b Periapical radiograph showing partially absorbed roots and infection in the involved deciduous
second molar. c Horizontal computed tomography view of the lesion showing small, high-density spots within a well-defined radiolucent
region, with buccal and lingual cortical expansion. d Sagittal computed tomography view For further confirmation of the diagnosis,
incisional biopsy was performed as follows. First, needle aspiration was performed, but only a small amount of mucoid liquid was obtained,
which was not adequate for cytological or microbiological examination. Then, the deciduous second molar was extracted, followed by tissue
incision through the extracted socket. The crown of the developing second premolar was exposed at the base of the cystic lesion, suggesting
the presence of a unicystic lesion. Finally, we created a window in the extracted socket for marsupialization to decrease the lesion size. A
biopsy specimen showed inflamed granulation tissue intermingled with ameloblastoma-like epithelium (Fig. 2a, b), which contained keratin
material, calcified material, and calcifying ghost cells (Fig. 2a, c). These clinical, radiographic, and histopathological findings
confirmed CCOT (the simple cystic variant) accompanied by dislocation of the permanent second premolar tooth germ. We planned to perform
enucleation and curettage after cyst shrinkage by marsupialization.Fig. 2Histopathological appearance of a biopsy specimen (hematoxylin and
eosin staining). a Low magnification, ×40. b Ameloblastoma-like epithelium can be observed at a higher magnification (×100) of a. c Ghost
cells in various stages of maturation and foci of calcification can be observed at a higher magnification (×400) of a Histopathological
appearance of a biopsy specimen (hematoxylin and eosin staining). a Low magnification, ×40. b Ameloblastoma-like epithelium can be observed
at a higher magnification (×100) of a. c Ghost cells in various stages of maturation and foci of calcification can be observed at a higher
magnification (×400) of a On postoperative day 10, the packing gauze was removed and an acrylic obturator positioned to keep the cavity
open. The patient and her parents were instructed to irrigate or rinse the cavity with saline solution twice a day. After 4 months of
follow-up, the size of the lesion had significantly decreased, with spontaneous eruption of the permanent second premolar. The obturator was
then replaced by a lingual arch as a space maintainer, which guided the premolar into its correct position. One year and nine months later,
progressive bone healing and normal eruption of the second premolar were observed on panoramic and periapical radiographs (Fig. 3); this
precluded the requirement for a second surgery. No recurrence was observed during a 7-year follow-up.Fig. 3Radiographs obtained 1 year and
9 months after marsupialization. a Panoramic radiograph showing disappearance of the radiolucent lesion and normal eruption of the second
premolar. b Periapical radiograph showing normal root formation in the second premolar Radiographs obtained 1 year and 9 months after
marsupialization. a Panoramic radiograph showing disappearance of the radiolucent lesion and normal eruption of the second premolar. b
Periapical radiograph showing normal root formation in the second premolar We reported a case involving an 8-year-old girl with the simple
variant of CCOT that was successfully managed using marsupialization alone. The noninvasive features of these lesions warrant enucleation
and curettage rather than extensive surgical treatment, which is often required for more aggressive neoplastic lesions such as DGCTs and
GCOCs . However, in young children, enucleation and curettage may damage the developing permanent tooth germs and important anatomical
structures located adjacent to the lesion. To minimize this risk, marsupialization or decompression should be considered as the first choice
of treatment before enucleation and curettage in children . This conservative treatment has been shown to be highly effective for other
odontogenic cystic lesions of the jaw, such as dentigerous cysts, radicular cysts, keratocystic odonotogenic tumors (KCOTs), and unicystic
ameloblastomas . Although secondary surgery such as enucleation is required when cyst shrinkage is incomplete, marsupialization or
decompression may result in complete resolution of these types of cystic lesions [8, 9]. Marsupialization or decompression has been applied
in only four pediatric cases of CCOTs thus far [4, 5]. All four patients had unicystic lesions accompanied by impacted teeth or odontoma-
like tooth structures. However, only one case was completely resolved by a single surgical procedure involving marsupialization and removal
of the calcified mass ; the remaining three required secondary surgery for the removal of residual tissue or odontomas [4, 5]. The present
case exhibited a unicystic lesion in the region of the deciduous mandibular right second molar, with dislocation of the permanent premolar
tooth germ. Odontoma-like structures were not identified, although the pulp of the deciduous second molar was necrotic, possibly because of
dental caries. Therefore, our diagnosis was the simple cystic variant of CCOT that radiographically resembled an inflammatory dentigerous
cyst, which is more frequently observed in patients with a mixed dentition. The surgical procedure of marsupialization in our patient
involved extraction of the involved deciduous tooth, incision of pathological tissue for microscopic examination, and creation of a window
in the extracted socket. The same technique is widely used for inflammatory dentigerous cysts associated with an infected deciduous tooth
and an impacted permanent successor in children with a primary or mixed dentition , and it may lead to complete ossification of bony defects
along with successful eruption of the permanent successor in the dentigerous cyst. Therefore, relieving the pressure within the bony cyst
may dramatically promote the active growth potential of bone and the eruption of the tooth germ in children. Similar to the results for
dentigerous cysts, complete bone healing and normal eruption of the dislocated permanent tooth were observed after marsupialization in our
patient. Thus, in addition to an excellent capacity for bone regeneration, the involved permanent tooth germ exhibited an excellent eruptive
potential because of its immature roots. Moreover, there were no odontoma-like structures or large calcified masses that could have
prevented shrinkage of the lesion. Collectively, these factors predicted successful healing after the single surgical procedure of
marsupialization. Although the residual mucosa was not subjected to histopathological examination, our clinical and radiographic findings
suggested that the pathological cells of CCOTs disappear by undergoing metaplasic transformation to normal mucosal cells; this has also been
confirmed after marsupialization or decompression of KCOTs [8, 10]. No signs of recurrence were observed during 7 years of follow-up in our
patient. However, further follow-up is necessary because CCOT recurrence has been reported to occur after 1–8 years . In conclusion, we
reported a pediatric case of CCOT that completely resolved with subsequent physiological eruption of the involved permanent tooth by
marsupialization only, illustrating the excellent potential of bone regeneration in children. Marsupialization should be considered the
first choice of treatment for pediatric CCOTs in order to minimize the damage to adjacent anatomical structures caused by enucleation and
curettage. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent form is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. calcifying cystic odontogenic
tumor World Health Organization calcifying odontogenic cysts ghost cell odontogenic tumors dentinogenic ghost cell tumors ghost cell
odontogenic carcinomas keratocystic odontogenic tumors Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions KM, SK, TS, and SN contributed to the treatment of the patient. KM and TS collected the clinical data. TK prepared
and analyzed the pathological data. KM drafted the manuscript. HY, KS, TK, NS, and KN helped in manuscript drafting. All authors have read
and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank Dr. Yuki Nakamura, Division of Dysphagia Rehabilitation, Department of Oral
Biological Science, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, who contributed treatment and oral care of the
patient. No source of funding supports the manuscript preparation.
