Dear Sir, Turner syndrome (TS), one of the most common sex chromosome disorders, is caused by numeric or structural abnormalities of the X
chromosome. It occurs in approximately 1 in every 2,500 newborns with female phenotype. The karyotypes are nonmosaic or mosaic, including
45,X, 46,X,del(Xp), 46,X,i(Xq), 45,X/46,XX, 45,X/46,XrX, 45,X/46,XY, 45X/47XXX. 45,X is a classical type. TS is associated with a variable
spectrum of clinical features, the defining features being short stature, gonadal dysgenesis and infertility.1 Numerous autoimmune diseases
in TS patients have been reported, such as juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, Addison's disease, psoriasis, celiac disease, vitiligo, alopecia
areata.2 However, SLE associated with TS has been rarely reported. Herein we present the case of a patient with TS associated with SLE. A
24-year-old girl presented with a 10-year history of edematous erythema on the face, which was exacerbated by sunlight. She was diagnosed
with TS at the age of 18 when she was referred for evaluation of short stature, amenorrhea and juvenile female external genitalia. She was
135cm in height. Butterfly facial erythema, discoid rash on the auricle, edematous/purplish erythema on the dorsum of the hands were noted
(Figure 1). Secondary sex characters were lacking. Intelligence and audition were normal. No other family member had similar features.
Chromosomal abnormality was confirmed by cytogenetic analysis (karyotype 45X) (Figure 2). Serum test for antinuclear antibodies (ANA) was
positive at a titer of 1:160. Anti-Ro(SSA) and La(SSB) antibodies were positive. Routine reproductive hormones testing suggested
estradiol<11.80pg/ml (referential range of follicular phase:19.5-144.2), follicle stimulating hormone 134.3mIU/ml (2.5-10.2), luteotropic
hormone 48.7mIU/ml (1.9-125). Other laboratory tests were unremarkable. Skin biopsy was refused. The patient was diagnosed with TS with SLE,
according to the revised criteria of the American Rheumatic Association (ARA) 1997 and the karyotype analysis result. She fulfilled four
criteria: butterfly facial erythema, discoid rash, photosensitivity and ANA 1:160. She was treated for SLE with prednisone (25mg twice
daily). At the same time, she took Calcium Carbonate and Vitamin D3 Compound (calcium carbonate 1.5g vitamin D3 125IU, one tablet once
daily) as a preventive measure against osteoporosis. The therapy was effective. (a) Butterfl y facial erythema, (b) Discoid rash on the
auricle, (c) Edematous or purplish erythema or purplish on the dorsum of the hands Photograph of the patient’s chromosomal analysis of
peripheral lymphocytes showing karyotype of 45X SLE in TS patients is extremely rare. The reported karyotypes in TS with SLE include
46,X,del(X) (q13) and 45X/46,XXq+, existing deletion of long-arm or short-arm of one X chromosome.3,4 One such case has been reported
without detailed karyotype.5 In the current case, we reveal a novel karyotype of 45,X, completely lacking one X chromosome. It is documented
that male patients with Klinefelter's syndrome (XXY) have similar risk to develop SLE compared to females (XX).3 This is consistent with the
low prevalence of SLE in TS, characterized by an abnormal or missing X chromosome. The pathogenetic mechanisms of SLE in TS have not been
clearly elucidated. In addition to the XX chromosome, other factors may also play a significant role in the pathogenesis of SLE. Further
researches are needed to shed light on the relationship between TS and SLE. Conflict of Interest: None. Financial Support: None. How to cite
this article: Bai J, Qiao JJ, Wu YH, Zhao ZZ, Fang H. Systemic lupus erythematosus in a patient with Turner syndrome. An Bras Dermatol.
2015;90(4):600-1. Study conducted at the Department of Dermatology, The First Affi liated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University
- People’s Republic of China.
