Encephalitis with antibodies against N-methyl D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) is recognized as a group of antibody-mediated neuropsychiatric
syndromes, which occurs with and without a tumor association. Neoplasm may contribute to the pathogenesis of Anti-NMDAR encephalitis in
tumor-positive patients. However, the underlying causes in tumor-negative patients are largely unknown. This is the first report, of which
we are aware, of two cases of anti-NMDAR encephalitis after the resection of melanocytic nevus. We describe 2 female patients in their 20s
confirmed with anti-NMDAR encephalitis. They shared two points in common: About several weeks (2 weeks and 5 weeks respectively) before the
initial symptom, both of them underwent a resection of melanocytic nevi; the screening tests for an ovarian teratoma and other tumors were
all negative. A 25 year-old woman presented with seizure, psychiatric symptoms and behavioral change for 2 weeks. Electroencephalogram
indicated electrographic seizures. Anti-NMDAR antibodies were all positive in the cerebrospinal fluid and serum. Her symptoms relieved
gradually after the treatment with steroids and mycophenolate mofetil. Another patient admitted to our hospital with psychosis, behavioral
change and complex partial seizure over a period of 5 months. Electroencephalogram demonstrated generalized slow activities. High titres of
anti-NMDAR antibodies were both detected in the cerebrospinal fluid and serum. She responded well to the first-line immunotherapy and got
substantial recovery. Our cases provided an observational link between anti-NMDAR encephalitis and resection of nevi. We postulate that the
exposure of certain antigen on nevus cell caused by nevi excision, which might be NMDA receptor or other mimic cross-reactive antigens, may
trigger an autoimmune response resulting in encephalitis. This suggested a potential site of antigen exposure triggering the immune response
in non-tumor associated anti-NMDAR encephalitis, which may lend support to elucidating the underlying immunopathological mechanisms. Further
studies are expected for investigating the expression of NMDA receptor on nevus cell and evaluating the validity of this hypothesis.
Encephalitis with antibodies against N-methyl D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) is recognized as a group of antibody-mediated neuropsychiatric
syndromes, which occurs with and without a tumor association. Neoplasm may contribute to the pathogenesis of anti-NMDAR encephalitis in
tumor-positive patients. Other evidence showed that non-specific systemic infections or vaccinations could act as an adjuvant of the
autoimmune response. However, the underlying causes in tumor-negative patients are still largely unknown. This is the first report, of which
we are aware, of two cases of anti-NMDAR encephalitis after the resection of melanocytic nevus. A 25 year-old woman presented with seizure,
psychiatric symptoms and behavioral change for 2 weeks. About 5 weeks before her first symptom, she underwent a resection of nevi on her
nose in a local hospital, of which the pathological diagnosis is compound nevus confirmed by the dermatologist. Her family history was
unremarkable. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed normal while the electroencephalogram (EEG) indicated electrographic
seizures. For her lumbar puncture, the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) white blood cell (WBC) count was 2/μL; the CSF protein concentration,
54 mg/dl. The CSF-specific oligoclonal bands were weak positive. The serum and CSF samples were tested for the antibodies to cell-surface
antigens including NMDAR, leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1 (LGI1), contactin-associated protein 2 (CASPR2), γ-amino-butyric acid-B receptor
(GABABR) and alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-iso-xazolepropionic acid receptors (AMPAR), using a commercial assay (Catalogue No. FA
112d-1003-1, EUROIMMUN AG, Lübeck, Germany). Anti-NMDAR antibodies were all positive in the CSF and serum. Screening with an
ultrasonographic examination of her ovaries and a computed tomographic scan of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed no evidence of tumors.
She received methylprednisolone at a dose of 1 g per day for 5 days. Steroids were tapered down gradually as her symptoms relieved.
Mycophenolate mofetil was added as the continued immunotherapy. The follow-up is still going on. A girl in her 20s was admitted to our
hospital with psychosis, behavioral change and complex partial seizure over a period of 5 months. A resection of nevus on her forehead was
performed about 2 weeks before her admission, which was intradermal nevus on the histopathology. The brain MRI was unremarkable and the EEG
demonstrated generalized slow activity. The CSF analysis revealed the WBC count was 66/μL with 99 lymphocytes and 1 % monocytes, and the
protein concentration level was 72 mg/dL. The same tests with serum and CSF for available antibodies to cell-surface antigens were performed
as previously described. High titres of anti-NMDAR antibodies were both detected in the CSF and serum. The screening tests for an ovarian
teratoma and other tumors were all negative. She received one course of intravenous immunoglobulin, 2 g/kg, divided into 5 days, followed
with intravenous methylprednisolone at an initial dosage of 80 mg per day. Gradually, her psychotic symptoms resolved and she was able to
follow simple commands and talk to her parents. The test for NMDAR antibody in CSF became negative afterwards while that in serum remained
positive. Anti-NMDAR encephalitis represents a characteristic immune-mediated and treatment responsive neuropsychiatric syndrome, with and
without a tumor association. Dalmau et al. reported the presence of an ovarian teratoma in over 50 % of anti-NMDAR encephalitis patients.
The tumor that expresses NMDA receptors may trigger the antibody response against NMDA receptors by ectopically expressing neuronal antigens
and contribute to breaking immune tolerance [2, 3]. However, they also indicated that 41 % of patients with anti-NMDAR encephalitis do not
have a clinically detectable tumor. Therefore, the underlying causes in tumor-negative patients are still largely unknown. Our cases
provided an observational link between anti-NMDAR encephalitis and resection of nevi, which may provide insights into the trigger factor of
immune response in non–tumor associated anti-NMDAR encephalitis. NMDA receptors are a class of ionotropic glutamate receptors (iGluRs) that
are essential for neuronal development, synaptic plasticity and cell survival. NMDA receptors are obligate heterotetramers comprising of a
combination of NR1, the obligatory subunit for a functional receptor, and structurally related NR2 subunits . Studies have demonstrated the
NR1 subunit of NMDA receptor is also expressed on human keratinocytes, using immunohistochemistry [5, 6]. Hoogduijn et al. found that
cultured melanocytes express the NMDA receptors 2A and 2C . Therefore, we postulate that the nevus cell may express NMDA receptor or other
mimic cross-reactive antigens on the cell surface. Exposure of certain antigens caused by nevi excision may trigger an autoimmune response
and generation of anti-NMDAR antibodies, resulting in encephalitis. This suggested a potential site of antigen exposure triggering the
immune response in non-tumor associated anti-NMDAR encephalitis, which may lend support to elucidating the underlying immunopathological
mechanisms. Further studies were expected for investigating the expression of NMDA receptor on nevus cell and evaluating the validity of
this hypothesis. Written informed consent was obtained from the two patients for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. Copies of the written consents are available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Magnetic resonance imaging
Electroencephalogram Cerebrospinal fluid White blood cell N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors Leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1 Contactin-
associated protein 2 γ-amino-butyric acid-B receptor Alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-iso-xazolepropionic acid receptors Ionotropic
glutamate receptors Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions HZG and XZY:
Concept and design of the study, acquisition of data and manuscript preparation. HTR: Laboratory tests with a broad anti-neuronal antibody
panel for suspected cases. TQ: Pathological consultation of the specimen of nevi. LYC: concept and design of the study and critical
manuscript revision. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. None
