Left ventricular posterior fascicular tachycardia (LVPFT) is an idiopathic form of VT characterized by right bundle branch block morphology
and left axis deviation. The mechanism of LPFVT is thought to be localized reentry close to the posterior fascicle. We present the case of a
24-year-old medical student who was admitted to the emergency department complaining of palpitations. The ECG showed an aspect suggestive of
LVPFT. Vagal maneuvers, adenosine and i.v. Metoprolol were ineffective in terminating the arrhythmia. Conversion to sinus rhythm was
obtained 10 h later, with i.v Amiodarone. The ECG in sinus rhythm showed left posterior fascicular block. Because antiarrhythmic drugs were
not desired by the patient, VT ablation was proposed. The electrophysiological study identified the mechanism of arrhythmia to be reentry
using the slowly conducting verapamil-sensitive fibers as the antegrade limb and the posterior fascicle as the retrograde limb.
Radiofrequency applications near the posterior fascicle, in the lower half of the interventricular septum, at the junction of the two
proximal thirds with the distal third interrupted the tachycardia and made it non-inducible at programmed stimulation. The case is unusual
as the patient had a left posterior fascicular block during sinus rhythm before ablation. This demonstrates that the reentry circuit of VT
does not need antegrade conduction through the posterior fascicle for perpetuation. Fascicular ventricular tachycardia (VT) is an idiopathic
form of VT characterized by right bundle branch block morphology and left axis deviation. It occurs predominantly in young males
(15–40 years old) . Left posterior fascicular VT (LPFVT) is the most frequent form, encountered in approximately 90% of cases, the other 10%
being represented by left anterior fascicular VT and upper septal fascicular VT . The mechanism of LPFVT is believed to be reentry using the
slowly conducting verapamil-sensitive fibers as the antegrade limb and the posterior fascicle as the retrograde limb . This type of VT
responds well to i.v. verapamil, but the therapy of choice is catheter ablation, due to the variable efficacy of chronic oral verapamil . A
24-year-old medical student was admitted to the emergency department due to palpitations triggered by emotional stress (after being on call
for 24 h) without hemodynamic instability. The palpitations had begun 1 h prior to his arrival at the hospital. His blood pressure was
130/70 mmHg and no signs of heart failure were present. The 12-lead ECG showed a right bundle branch block (RBBB) wide QRS tachycardia with
right axis deviation, an aspect suggesting fascicular VT (Fig. 1). Intravenously adenosine and betablockers were ineffective in terminating
the arrhythmia. After intravenous Amiodarone, ventricular captures and fusions beats confirmed the diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia
(Fig. 2), which subsequently converted to sinus rhythm 10 h later (Fig. 3). Laboratory values including hemogram, liver function tests,
renal function tests, serum electrolytes and TSH were normal. Echocardiography showed a non-dilated left ventricle with normal systolic and
diastolic function. A minor anterior mitral valve leaflet prolapse was seen. He was discharged on oral Verapamil 80 mg bid, but the patient
refused chronic antiarrhythmic treatment. He was offered a catheter ablation procedure as an alternative, which he accepted.Fig. 1ECG during
ventricular tachycardia. ECG shows a monomorphic right bundle branch block tachycardia with a QRS duration of 120 ms (narrower than other
forms of VT) right axis deviation, an appearance illustrative for fascicular ventricular tachycardia.Fig. 2ECG after amiodarone infusion.
After slowing the heart rate with amiodarone, ECG shows captures (red arrow) and fusion beats (green arrow) suggestive of ventricular
tachycardia.Fig. 3ECG after 10 h of amiodarone infusion. ECG shows conversion to sinus rhythm. In lead I the QRS complex is negative,
suggestive of an intrinsic disease of the postero-inferior fascicle of the left branch. ECG during ventricular tachycardia. ECG shows a
monomorphic right bundle branch block tachycardia with a QRS duration of 120 ms (narrower than other forms of VT) right axis deviation, an
appearance illustrative for fascicular ventricular tachycardia. ECG after amiodarone infusion. After slowing the heart rate with amiodarone,
ECG shows captures (red arrow) and fusion beats (green arrow) suggestive of ventricular tachycardia. ECG after 10 h of amiodarone infusion.
ECG shows conversion to sinus rhythm. In lead I the QRS complex is negative, suggestive of an intrinsic disease of the postero-inferior
fascicle of the left branch. After obtaining informed consent, an electrophysiological study was performed in a post-absorptive state, using
a tridimensional electroanatomical mapping system (CARTO® 3, Biosense Webster). An anatomical map of the left ventricle was initially
created, carefully delineating the mitral annulus, the aortic annulus, the conduction system with the His bundle, the left posterior
fascicle and the left anterior fascicle (Fig. 4). The electroanatomical bipolar voltage map did not show any area of ventricular scar.
Programmed ventricular stimulation was then performed, which induced a wide QRS complex tachycardia with RBBB aspect and right superior
axis, with the same cycle length and aspect on the 12 lead ECG compared to his clinical tachycardia. Because the tachycardia was well-
tolerated, an activation map of the left ventricle was created. The mechanism of the tachycardia was found to be reentry involving the
posterior fascicle, with the exit point situated in the lower half of the interventricular septum, close to the apex. The activation spread
from this point to the entire left ventricle. The last region of the left ventricle which was activated was the postero-basal region
(Fig. 5).Fig. 4Three dimensional electroanatomical mapping of the left branch of the conduction system. Mapping was done using the Carto 3
system (Biosense Webster). Left ventricular anatomy reconstructed during anatomical mapping; with gray the ascending aorta. Yellow dots His
bundle location (the electrical signal at this level shows a sharp ample potential). Blue dots the antero-superior fascicle (the electrical
signal at this level shows a sharp small potential). Green dots the postero-inferior fascicle (electrical signal at this level shows a sharp
small potential). White lines the region of the postero-inferior fascicle where the ablation points were targeted.Fig. 5Activation mapping
of the left ventricle using the Carto 3 system (Biosense Webster). The red area indicates the area of earliest activation. The last region
of the left ventricle activated during VT is the latero-basal wall and is indicated by the blue and purple color. Fast, ample presystolic
potentials were recorded at the level of postero-inferior fascicle, which express activation of the local Purkinje network (white and black
dots). Bipolar electrograms obtained at the level of postero-inferior fascicle are indicated by blue color. Three dimensional
electroanatomical mapping of the left branch of the conduction system. Mapping was done using the Carto 3 system (Biosense Webster). Left
ventricular anatomy reconstructed during anatomical mapping; with gray the ascending aorta. Yellow dots His bundle location (the electrical
signal at this level shows a sharp ample potential). Blue dots the antero-superior fascicle (the electrical signal at this level shows a
sharp small potential). Green dots the postero-inferior fascicle (electrical signal at this level shows a sharp small potential). White
lines the region of the postero-inferior fascicle where the ablation points were targeted. Activation mapping of the left ventricle using
the Carto 3 system (Biosense Webster). The red area indicates the area of earliest activation. The last region of the left ventricle
activated during VT is the latero-basal wall and is indicated by the blue and purple color. Fast, ample presystolic potentials were recorded
at the level of postero-inferior fascicle, which express activation of the local Purkinje network (white and black dots). Bipolar
electrograms obtained at the level of postero-inferior fascicle are indicated by blue color. Using a retrograde aortic approach, an
irrigated 3.5 mm tip catheter (Navistar Thermocool) was introduced in the left ventricle. Radiofrequency (RF) was applied near the posterior
fascicle, in the lower half of the interventricular septum, at the junction of the two proximal thirds with the distal third (Fig. 6), with
a power of 30 W and a target temperature of 45°C. Here, a Purkinje potential preceded the local ventricular electrogram by 30 ms.
Application of RF led to prompt interruption of the tachycardia, which was subsequently non-inducible following programmed ventricular
stimulation. After a follow-up of 9 months, the patient remains free of palpitations and the Holter EKG revealed no VT
episodes.Fig. 6Ablation of the left postero-inferior fascicle using the Carto 3 system (Biosense Webster). The red dots indicate ablation
points at the level of the postero-inferior fascicle, at the junction of the two proximal thirds with the distal third. Ablation of the left
postero-inferior fascicle using the Carto 3 system (Biosense Webster). The red dots indicate ablation points at the level of the postero-
inferior fascicle, at the junction of the two proximal thirds with the distal third. LVPFT is the most common form of idiopathic ventricular
tachycardia originating from the left ventricle. It is characterized by a reentry mechanism using the slowly conducting verapamil-sensitive
fibers and the posterior fascicle. The slowly conducting verapamil-sensitive fibers have decremental conduction properties, similar to the
atrioventricular node . The most common type of reentry uses verapamil-sensitive fibers as the antegrade limb and the posterior fascicle as
the retrograde limb. Retrograde activation in the posterior fascicle occurs from the apical septum to basal septum . The activation mapping
performed during VT in the present case supports existing data from the literature, demonstrating that the reentry circuit does not need
anterograde conduction through the posterior fascicle to support reentry, as the patient had left posterior fascicular block during sinus
rhythm. Retrograde conduction can still be present during antegrade block; therefore, the fascicle can be used as the retrograde limb of the
reentry circuit. Kuo et al. also showed that RF ablation of LVPFT did not result in fascicular block, concluding that the reentry circuit
involves the tissue adjacent to posterior fascicle and not the fascicle itself. Morishima et al. suggested that the posterior fascicle could
be just a bystander to the reentry circuit. They used information from a sinus beat that selectively captured the posterior fascicle and
performed entrainment mapping of the circuit. The recent report of Maeda et al. elegantly demonstrated that the posterior fascicle was
indeed a bystander, representing neither the antegrade nor retrograde limb of the circuit. The anatomic basis of this arrhythmia has
attracted considerable interest over time. It was discovered that some patients with LVPFT have a false tendon or fibromuscular band in the
left ventricle. The exact mechanism by which this fibromuscular band contributes to the tachycardia is incompletely understood; some authors
suggest electrical conduction through the fibromuscular band, others believe that stretch produced by this false tendon in the Purkinje
network could provide the necessary conditions to tachycardia initiation [9, 10]. In most cases, radiofrequency ablation can be performed
successfully . However, when the tachycardia is non-inducible during the electrophysiological study, the site of ablation cannot be
identified. In these cases, electroanatomical mapping can provide a more precise site for RF ablation: the mid-septum or the apical septum
of the left ventricle . In the study of Chen et al., mapping and linear ablation were performed during sinus rhythm using a three-
dimensional mapping system. They demonstrated that by creating a linear lesion perpendicular to the posterior left fascicle, the tachycardia
substrate is modified enough so that it can no longer be induced, with the cost of a left posterior fascicular block . When suspicion of
LPFVT on the 12-lead ECG exists, the diagnosis and the mechanism can be clarified using the electrophysiological study. First-line
pharmacological treatment is Verapamil, due to the involvement of a verapamil-sensitive zone in the reentry circuit. Catheter ablation is an
effective treatment method and is recommended when symptoms are severe or when pharmacological treatment is ineffective/poorly tolerated, or
antiarrhythmic drugs are not desired by the patient. The present case is particular by the presence of left posterior block during sinus
rhythm, which demonstrates that the reentry circuit does not need the posterior fascicle as an antegrade limb for the perpetuation of the
arrhythmia. The patient, who is a medical student, gave his consent for publication of medical information and images concerning his case.
His real name is not provided. ventricular tachycardia left posterior fascicular ventricular tachycardia intravenously PP, GC, LM, RR, MP,
MA, GG, RM made the diagnosis and performed ablation, helped with the analysis and interpretation of data provided by the
electrophysiological study; helped to draft the manuscript sections: background, case report and conclusions; made the review of the
literature. PAM, DZ, DP helped with the overall design of the case report, coordinated the review of the literature and the final shape of
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This paper was published under the frame of European Social Found, Human
Resources Development Operational Programme 2007–2013, project nr. POSDRU 159/1.5/138776: TRANSCENT. Competing interests The authors declare
that they have no competing interests.
