When the frontal lobe of the brain is affected important behavioral changes may occur mainly at the level of executive functioning, i.e.,
planning, decision-making, judgment and self-perception. However, the behavioral changes may be of different nature with marked indifference
and apathy. We report a clinical case of an 81-year-old patient with sudden onset of behavioral changes that were initially interpreted as
an acute confusional episode of infectious etiology, but actually they were due to an ischemic lesion in the frontal lobe. The frontal lobe
is the largest lobe and it is linked, in a complex manner, to multiple regions of the brain. Injury to frontal bone can lead to variety of
clinical presentations. However, this injury assessment is often neglected in routine neurological exams and also in tests for mental state
examination to test frontal lobe function such as Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE). The Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB) and Montreal
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA©) are other tests that can be useful to evaluate frontal lobe function.(1,2) When frontal lobe is affected
changes may occur in the behavior particularly in executive functions, such as planning, decision making, judgment and self-perception.(2,3)
The most common form is characterized by emotional liability and changes in social judgment and impulse control. Other changes are
characterized by marked indifference and apathy. The individual can lose the interest for his/her daily activities and seem indifferent to
surrounding facts. Both cases can be associated with frontal lobe injuries (the first, injury to orbitomedial and the second, injury to the
dorsolateral prefrontal) named as frontal lobe syndrome.(4) Patients with frontal dorsolateral cortex injuries can also have little working
memory for verbal information (if the left hemisphere is significantly affect) or for spatial information (if right hemisphere is the most
injured area).(2) Injuries in the inferotemporal circuit can be associated to deficits in visual discrimination, visual hallucination and
psychosis. Frontal lobe syndromes can present several etiologies: mental delay, traumatic brain injuries, brain tumors, degenerative
dementia, cerebrovascular disease, normal pressure hydrocephalus, schizophrenia, depression, among others.(1,2) The major differential
diagnoses to frontal lobe syndrome are urinary tract infection, septicemia, hipo or hyperglycemia, thiamine deficiency, among other. In
addition, it may be associated with abuse or abstinence of drugs and iatrogenesis, particularly sedative or anticholinergic drugs.
Neurological conditions should be equally considered, such as, cranioencephalic traumatism, epilepsy or encephalitis. Other general causes,
i.e., obstipation, dehydration, pain or sensorial privation should be also investigate.(5) We report a case of an 81-year-old widow (MNF),
autonomous for daily life activities and with history of hypertension and dyslipidemia. She was referred to family physician because of
sudden change on her behavior such as isolation, psychomotor agitation, hetero-aggressiveness, anomie, visual/auditory verbal
hallucinations, persecutory deliriums and total insomnia. The computed tomography scan of the brain showed large periventricular parietal
focal atrophy in the left side. Lacunar stroke internal capsule and left thalamic lacunar stroke. It also showed diffuse cortical and
subcortical cerebral atrophy with predominance in frontal and temporal internal to left side, mural atheromatosis calcification of the
carotid siphons, and inflammation of left middle ear. She was referred to emergency service and her exams showed a mild neutrophilia of
8,950x109/L, CRP test of 2.8mg/dL, urine II with leukocyturia (70cell/uL), erythrocyturia (25cell/uL) and negative nitrite test. The
computed tomography scan of the brain was redone and no de novo alterations were seen. The patient was discharged and risperidone 1mg daily
was prescribed. In the night after discharge she had total insomnia. She returned to the emergency service and remained hospitalized for one
hour for surveillance. She was debilitated, extremely sleepy and had little reaction to stimulus, including painful stimulus. The CRP test
was repeated and it was 1.8mg/dL. In the subsequent day, the patient was vigil and had psychomotor agitation. In addition, she was
disoriented in time and space in time and space, self and allopsychically oriented, disinhibited, sometimes presented caught, but not fixed,
attention, had fluent and spontaneous discourse, but incoherent responses. The patient also had loose association and audio and visual
hallucination. The suspicion diagnosis was acute confusional state and the neurologist’s opinion was requested. The neurologist did not
observe significant alterations in neurological exam, no deficits in cranial partners, strength, sensibility or limbs coordination, and also
no meningeal signs. For exclusion of meningitis/encephalitis with eventual onset point in middle hearing, a lumbar puncture was performed
and revealed a limpid aspect liquor with normal cytochemical characteristics. She returned to psychiatry and repeated the analyses that
revealed leukocytosis 17,500x109/L with neutrophil (85.68%), CRP test 4.66mg/dL, urine II with leukocyturia (17cell/uL), erythrocyturia
(37cell/uL) and negative nitrite test and normal thyroid functions. The internal medicine department interpreted laboratorial findings as
possible non-complicated cystitis. The patient was hospitalized for etiologic investigation and treatment. A significant increase of CRP was
seen for 12.3mg/dL and, because of slight changes in urine II, an antibiotic therapy was introduced with cefhiaxone after the urine culture
collection that was negative. She underwent the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test, which was negative, and underwent
replacement of thiamine so that admitting deficit of vitamin. In order to exclude other non-urinary infectious causes due to the increase of
inflammatory parameters, the patient underwent blood culture with negative results and echocardiogram and thoracic-abdominal-pelvic CT scan,
which revealed no significant changes (Chart 1). Chart 1Complementary exams and diagnosisAn 81-year-old women with sudden change on
behavior, isolation, psychomotor agitation, hetero-aggressiveness, anomie, visual/auditory verbal hallucinations, persecutory deliriums and
total insomniaDiferential diagnosisOrganic clinical picture versus psychiatric clinical pictureComputed tomography scan of the
brainInflammation of left middle earNeurologyNo focal sings in neurologic examLumbar punctureLimpid aspect liquor and with normal
cytochemical characteristicsAnalysesLeukocytosis (17.500x109/L) with mild neutrophilia (85,68%), high CRP test of (4.66mg/dL →
12.3mg/dL)Urine II with leukocyturia (17 cell/uL) and erythrocyturia (37 cell/uL)Hospitalized patient with suspicion of uncomplicated
cystitisAntibiotic therapy with cefriaxoneNegative urine cultureExclusion of no urinary tract causes for inflammatory/confusion clinical
featureNegative VDRLNegative blood cultureEcocardiograpm without changesNormal thyroid functionThoracic-abdominal-pelvic CT scan without
signficant changesMaintenance of behavioral changesCranioencefálico magnetic resonance imagingCortical and subcortical frontal internal
injury compatible with possible subacute failureVDRL: Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; TAP- CT: thoracic-abdominal-pelvic computed
tomography scan. VDRL: Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; TAP- CT: thoracic-abdominal-pelvic computed tomography scan. For maintenance of
behavioral changes, a cranioencephalic magnetic resonance imaging was performed and revealed a “parafacial internal frontal cortical-
subcortical injury in convexity to the right, measuring about 21mm in diameter, which is compatible with possible subacute failure”. We
begin administration of captopril 12.5mg 3id, acetylsalicylic acid (AAS) 250mg 1id and rosuvastatin 10mg 1id, in addition psychiatric drugs
were adjusted (quetiapine 25 1id). The patient had progressively improvement. At discharge she was oriented in time, but not in space, had
an euthymic mood, no visual/auditory verbal hallucinations, no changes on format and content of thinking, caught and fixed attention,
coherence and spontaneous discourse, insight and critical judgment. She was discharged and referred to her family physician and to a
psychiatrist. This study main clinical findings (sudden behavioral changes in an old woman) and laboratorial tests (Leukocytosis with mild
neutrophilia, high CRP, urine II with leukocyturia and erythrocyturia) lead the hypothesis of urinary infection. The patient was admitted to
internal medicine service with hypothesis of uncomplicated cystitis. Her urine culture was negative and no improvement was seen in clinical
picture after administration of antibiotic therapy. In order to exclude other non-urinary infections due to the increase in inflammatory
parameters, more complementary exams were requested for the diagnosis. Of these the only one that presented changes was the cranioencephalic
magnetic resonance imaging that revealed “fronta cortical-subcortical injury compatible with possible subacute failure”. Sudden change of
mental status, disorientation, fluctuations of consciousness, difficult to get focused and keep attention, sleep-alertness disorders,
psychomotor agitation and hallucination (typically visual) led to the exclusion of organic cause, namely cerebrovascular. Other clinical
pictures exist and they that can lead to the same type of symptoms, but in more insidious form: dementia, psychotic affective disorders.(6)
In this case, the uncommon localization of the ischemic event not detected in cranioencephalic magnetic resonance imaging, the lack of focal
deficits and changes in other inflammatory parameters can lead to no diagnostic suspicion of frontal lobe syndrome. This case reinforces the
importance to suspect and investigate the etiology of acute confusional states, especially in older population, when the diagnosis is
challenging. O lobo frontal, quando afetado, pode provocar alterações importantes do comportamento, principalmente na função executiva:
planejamento, tomada de decisões, juízo e autopercepção. Contudo, as alterações podem ser de outra natureza, caracterizando-se por marcada
indiferença e apatia. É relatado aqui o caso de uma paciente de 81 anos, com alterações súbitas do comportamento, que foram interpretadas
inicialmente como um quadro confusional agudo de natureza infecciosa, mas que se mostraram provocadas por uma lesão isquêmica na região
frontal. O lobo frontal é o maior e liga-se de forma complexa a múltiplas regiões do cérebro. Quando afetado, pode levar a uma
multiplicidade de apresentações clínicas. Contudo, com frequência não é avaliado especificamente nos exames neurológicos de rotina e nem
testes utilizados para avaliar o estado mental, como o Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), não foram concebidos para testar a função do
lobo frontal. O Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB) e o Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA©) são outros testes que podem ser úteis para
avaliar do lobo frontal.(1,2) Quando o lobo frontal é afetado, podem ocorrer alterações do comportamento, nomeadamente das funções
executivas: planejamento, tomada de decisões, juízo e autopercepção.(2,3) A forma mais comum caracteriza-se por labilidade emocional e
alterações no controle do impulso e do juízo social. Também pode ocorrer outra forma, caracterizada por marcada indiferença e apatia. O
indivíduo pode perder o interesse por suas atividades habituais e parecer indiferente aos acontecimentos ao seu redor. Ambos os casos podem
estar associados a lesão dos lobos frontais (o primeiro, com lesões orbitomediais e o segundo, com lesões pré-frontais dorsolaterais), sendo
referidos como síndromes do lobo frontal.(4) Os doentes com lesões no córtex frontal dorsolateral podem também apresentar pouca memória de
trabalho para informação verbal (se o hemisfério esquerdo está predominantemente afetado) ou para a informação espacial (se o hemisfério
direito é o mais lesionado).(2) Lesões a nível do circuito inferotemporal podem estar associadas a défices na discriminação visual,
alucinações visuais e psicose. As síndromes do lobo frontal podem ter várias etiologias: atraso mental, lesão cerebral traumática, tumores
cerebrais, demências degenerativas, doença cerebrovascular, hidrocefalia de pressão normal, esquizofrenia, depressão, entre outras.(1,2) Os
principais diagnósticos diferenciais relativamente à síndrome do lobo frontal são condições médicas como, por exemplo, infecção do trato
urinário, septicemia, hipo ou hiperglicemia, deficiência de tiamina, entre outras, além de abuso ou abstinência de drogas e iatrogenia,
particularmente com medicamentos sedativos ou anticolinérgicos. Devem ser consideradas igualmente condições neurológicas, como, por exemplo,
traumatismo craniencefálico, epilepsia ou encefalite. Outras causas mais gerais, como obstipação, desidratação, dor ou privação sensorial,
também devem ser investigadas.(5) Paciente (MNF) com 81 anos de idade, viúva e autônoma para as atividades da vida diária, com antecedentes
de hipertensão arterial e dislipidemia. Foi levada ao seu médico de família por alteração súbita do seu comportamento, apresentando
isolamento, agitação psicomotora, heteroagressividade, anomia, alucinações visuais e auditivo-verbais, delírios persecutórios e insônia
total. Fez tomografia computadorizada craniencefálica que revela “áreas de atrofia focais periventriculares parietais de maiores dimensões à
esquerda. Enfartes lacunares núcleo-capsulares e talâmico esquerdo. Padrão de atrofia córtico-subcortical encefálica difusa de predomínio
frontal e temporal interno à esquerda. Calcificações ateromatosas murais nos sifões carotídeos. Preenchimento inflamatório do ouvido médio
esquerdo.” Recorreu ao serviço de urgência, onde faz análises que revelam ligeira neutrofilia de 8.950x109/L, PCR de 2,8mg/dL, urina II com
leucocitúria (70cel/uL), eritrocitúria (25cel/uL) e pesquisa de nitritos negativa. Repete tomografia computadorizada craniencefálica que não
revelou alterações de novo. Tem alta medicada com risperidona 1mg uma vez por dia. Manteve-se agitada e com insônia total naquela noite.
Regressa ao serviço de urgência, onde passou uma noite no serviço de observação, prostrada, muito sonolenta e pouco reativa a estímulos,
incluindo dolorosos. Repetiu análises que mostram PCR de 1,81mg/dL. No dia seguinte, a paciente encontrava-se vigil, com agitação
psicomotora, desorientada no tempo, espaço, auto e alopsiquicamente, desinibida, com atenção por vezes captável, mas não fixável, com
discurso espontâneo e fluente, mas incoerente, com respostas ao lado e marcado afrouxamento das associações e atividade alucinatória
auditiva e visual. Ponderou-se a hipótese de quadro confusional agudo e pediu-se a colaboração da Neurologia, que não encontrou alterações
significativas no exame neurológico, nomeadamente sem défices nos pares cranianos, na força, sensibilidade ou coordenação nos membros, e sem
sinais meníngeos. Para exclusão de meningite/encefalite com eventual ponto de partida no ouvido médio, fez-se punção lombar, com saída de
liquor límpido e com citoquímica normal. Regressou à Psiquiatria e repetiu análises, que revelam leucocitose de 17.500x109/L com neutrofilia
(85,68%), PCR de 4,66mg/dL, urina II com leucocitúria (17cel/uL), eritrocitúria (37cel/uL), além de pesquisa de nitritos negativa e provas
de função tiroideia normais. Foi observada pela Medicina Interna, que interpretou achados laboratoriais como possível cistite não
complicada, sendo internada para investigação etiológica e tratamento. Verificou-se um aumento substancial da PCR para 12,3mg/dL e, por
ligeiras alterações na urina II, iniciou antibioterapia com ceftriaxona após a coleta de urocultura, que veio negativa. Efetuou o teste
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL), que foi negativo, e foi realizada reposição vitamínica de tiamina, admitindo-se défice
vitamínico. Na tentativa de exclusão de outras causas infecciosas não urinárias para o aumento dos parâmetros inflamatórios, a paciente
realizou hemoculturas, que se verificaram negativas, e ecocardiograma e TC tóraco-abdomino-pélvica, sem alterações relevantes a salientar
(Quadro 1). Quadro 1Exames complementares e marcha diagnósticaPaciente feminina, 81 anos, alteração súbita do comportamento, isolamento,
agitação psicomotora, heteroagressividade, anomia, alucinações visuais e auditivo-verbais, delírios persecutórios e insônia totalDiagnóstico
diferencialQuadro orgânico versus quadro psiquiátricoTomografia computadorizada craniencefálicaSem alterações agudas. Preenchimento
inflamatório do ouvido médio esquerdoNeurologiaSem sinais focais ao exame neurológicoPunção lombarLíquor límpido e com citoquímica
normalAnálisesLeucocitose (17.500x109/L) com neutrofilia (85,68%) e subida de PCR (4,66mg/dL → 12,3mg/dL)Urina II com leucocitúria
(17cel/uL) e eritrocitúria (37cel/uL)Doente internada com suspeita de cistite não complicadaAntibioterapia com ceftriaxonaUrocultura
negativaExclusão de causas não urinárias para o quadro inflamatório/ confusionalVDRL negativoHemoculturas negativasEcocardiograma sem
alteraçõesFunção tiroideia normalTC-TAP sem alterações relevantesManutenção das alterações do comportamentoRessonância magnética
craniencefálicaLesão cortico-subcortical frontal interna compatível com possível enfarte subagudoVDRL: Venereal Disease Research Laboratory;
TC-TAP: tomografia computadorizada tóraco-abdomino-pélvica. VDRL: Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; TC-TAP: tomografia computadorizada
tóraco-abdomino-pélvica. Por manutenção das alterações do comportamento, realizou ressonância magnética craniencefálica que revelou “lesão
córtico-subcortical frontal interna parafacial na convexidade à direita, medindo cerca de 21mm de maior diâmetro, compatível com possível
enfarte subagudo”. Iniciou medicação com captopril 12,5mg 3id, ácido acetilsalicílico (AAS) 250mg 1id e rosuvastatina 10mg 1id, sendo feito
ajuste da medicação psiquiátrica (quetiapina 25 1id). A paciente melhorou progressivamente, apresentando-se, à data da alta, orientada na
pessoa e no tempo, não orientada no espaço, com humor eutímico, sem alucinações auditivo-verbais e visuais, sem alterações da forma e do
conteúdo do pensamento, com atenção captável e fixável, discurso coerente e espontâneo, com insight e juízo crítico. Teve alta referenciada
ao seu médico de família e consulta de Psiquiatria. Os principais achados clínicos (alteração súbita de comportamento em idosa) e
laboratoriais (leucocitose com neutrofilia, PCR aumentada, urina II com leucocitúria e eritrocitúria) apontavam para a hipótese de infecção
urinária, sendo então a doente internada no Serviço de Medicina Interna, com a hipótese diagnóstica de cistite não complicada. Fez
urocultura, que foi negativa e não se verificou melhoria do quadro clínico com antibioterapia. Na tentativa de exclusão de outras causas
infecciosas não urinárias para o aumento dos parâmetros inflamatórios, fizeram-se mais exames complementares de diagnóstico, dos quais o
único que apresentou alterações foi a ressonância magnética craniencefálica que revelou “lesão córtico-subcortical frontal compatível com
possível enfarte subagudo”. A alteração súbita do estado mental, com desorientação, flutuações do estado de consciência, dificuldade em
focar e manter a atenção, distúrbio do ciclo sono-vigília, agitação psicomotora e alucinações (tipicamente visuais) obrigou a exclusão de
causa orgânica, nomeadamente cerebrovascular. Existem outros quadros clínicos que podem levar ao mesmo tipo de sintomatologia, mas de forma
mais insidiosa: demência, perturbações afetivas e psicóticas.(6) Nesse caso, a localização pouco habitual do evento isquêmico não detectada
na tomografia computadorizada craniencefálica a ausência de défices focais e as alterações de outros parâmetros inflamatórios podem ter
levado à não suspeição de uma síndrome do lobo frontal. Este caso reforça a importância de suspeitar e pesquisar a etiologia de estados
confusionais agudos, sobretudo em idades mais avançadas, quando o diagnóstico é particularmente desafiante.
