Primary systemic amyloidosis (PSA) is one of systemic amyloidosis, characterized by clonal plasma cell disorder. The disease is rare and
with high fatality. Signs and symptoms of PSA are various and complex, which depend on the organs involved. Here we report a case in which
the patient initially suffered from gastrointestinal symptoms. Gradually periorbital purpura, skin fragility, and subsequent petechiae,
ecchymoses and sclerosis of the distal limbs, appeared. Biopsy of his palmar skin showed scleroderma-like changes. However, histopathology
of the petechiae lesion on forehead with Crystal Violet Staining prompted deposition of amyloid; gastric mucosal biopsy with Congo Red
staining was also positive, which made clear the diagnosis of PSA. Bone marrow biopsy and serum immunofixation electrophoresis (IFE)
revealed plasmacytosis and M proteinemia. Other examinations were performed to assess the function of organs. PSA was challenging due to the
initial atypical clinical presentation and absence of biopsy with special staining. The case demonstrates that PSA should be considered in
patients with multisystemic symptoms and biopsy with Congo Red staining should be performed to exclusively diagnose amyloidosis. Primary
systemic amyloidosis (PSA), also called Lubarsch-Pick disease, is a rare, complex and protean disease. Currently, it is a mortal disease
without any effective therapy, and its median survival time is approximatedly 13 months . In the US, the incidence of PSA is estimated to be
approximately 1275 to 3200 new cases per year . Here we report a case of PSA initially presenting with gastrointestinal symptoms. However,
it had been misdiagnosed of scleroderma and recurrent chronic gastritis. A 47-year-old male presented with recurrent dizziness, generalized
weakness, easy fatiguablility, accompanied with discontinuous abdominal pain, dyspepsia and constipation for six years. He had been examined
with gastroendoscope and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head for several times, but no specific lesion could be identified.
Gradually the skin of his fingers and toes became sclerotic. At the same time, multiple, non-itchy petechiae, purpura and ecchymoses lesions
can been found around the eyelids, as well as on the tongue, cheek, neck and the higher chest wall bilaterally (Fig. 1a-f). Biopsy of his
palmar skin showed scleroderma-like changes. He had been treated as chronic gastritis and scleroderma. However, his symptoms were aggressive
and he came to our hospital. His blood examinations and stool anlysis were found within normal limits. Serum amyloid A protein (SAA) was
also negative. Skin biopsy of the forehead lesion showed pink amorphous, eosinophilic fissured masses in the dermis with Haemotoxylin &
Eosin staining (Fig. 2). Moreover, it showed purple amorphous fissured masses in dermis with Crystal Violet staining (Fig. 3), which
prompted the deposition of amyloid. Besides, histopathologic examination of the gastric mucosal revealed the extensive deposition of amyloid
in the gland stomach tissues and vessel wall. The tissue displayed orange–red color with Congo Red staining under the light microscopy
(Fig. 4), and showed characteristic apple-green birefringence under polarized light (Fig. 5). Moreover, it showed pale orange–red after
potassium permanganate pretreatment (Fig. 6), consistent with the diagnosis of PSA (light chains, AL). Bone marrow biopsy showed a
proliferation of 14 % mature plasma cells. Proteinuria electrophoresis showed the presence of Bence-Jones protein. Immunofixation of the
concentrated urine detected light chains of LAM-type. Serum and urine immunofixation electrophoresis (IFE) were both positive for monoclonal
protein. Analysis of the results showed M proteinemia of IgA-LAM. Quantitative immunoglobulin studies showed a serum IgG value of 3.82 g/l
(normal 7–16 g/l), IgA 2.44 g/l (0.7–4 g/l) and IgM 0.20 g/l (0.5–2.20 g/l). Surprisingly, according to the whole abdomen Computed
Tomography and ultrasound, we found the patient relied on a solitary right kidney as the left residue was found in the pelvic cavity without
any sign of blood flow. Urinalysis showed occult blood and protein quantitative testing for urine protein was 4.1 g/24 h, and blood
creatinine and urea nitrogen were in the high level. He was treated with prednisone (40 mg/d), thalidomide, colchicine tablets and gastric
mucosa protective drugs. After a month, skin lesion and digestive symptoms improved, but he left hospital because of economic cause.Fig.
1(a-d) Petechiae, purpura distributed on the forehead, neck, cheek and tongue; (e-f) Digital skin changed as sclerodermaFig.
2Microphotograph showed pink eosinophilic homogenous material in the dermis, H&E X 40Fig. 3Skin biopsy with crystal violet stain(X 40)
showed bright purple amorphous fissured masses in the dermisFig. 4Histopathology of gastric mucosa showed orange-red positivity with Congo
Red staining (X 40)Fig. 5Histopathology of gastric mucosa with Congo Red staining showed characteristic apple-green birefringence under
polarized light (X10)Fig. 6Histopathology of gastric mucosa with Congo Red staining showed pale orange–red after potassium permanganate
pretreatment (Microphotograph X40) (a-d) Petechiae, purpura distributed on the forehead, neck, cheek and tongue; (e-f) Digital skin changed
as scleroderma Microphotograph showed pink eosinophilic homogenous material in the dermis, H&E X 40 Skin biopsy with crystal violet stain(X
40) showed bright purple amorphous fissured masses in the dermis Histopathology of gastric mucosa showed orange-red positivity with Congo
Red staining (X 40) Histopathology of gastric mucosa with Congo Red staining showed characteristic apple-green birefringence under polarized
light (X10) Histopathology of gastric mucosa with Congo Red staining showed pale orange–red after potassium permanganate pretreatment
(Microphotograph X40) PSA is a clonal plasma cell disorder, including the production, aggregation, polymerization, fibril formation and
finally extracellular deposition in various organs of the precursor protein, ultimately leading to organ dysfunction and death . Symptoms
and signs of it are various and complex, which depend on the organs involved. In the early state, patients may present some non-specific
clinical symptoms, such fatigue, weight loss, paresthesias and syncopal attacks, just as the patient in this case. Guadually, intracutaneous
hemorrhage manifests in the form of petechiae, purpura and ecchymoses due to infiltration of blood vessel walls by amyloid deposits, which
are the most common skin lesions. At the same time, symptoms of the affected organs can appear, manifesting multisystem symptoms. In some
cases, skin lesions can be atypical, such as multiple papules instead of petechiae and ecchymoses on head and face. In other words,
insufficient understanding of the rash is easy to lead to misdiagnosis and delay of treatments. Firstly, in order to make correct diagnosis
of the disease, biopsy with Congo Red staining of the affected organ is significant. Routine pathological examination without the special
staining always leads to misdiagnosis . As in the case, gastrointestinalscope only presented the feature of chronic erosive gastritis
without Congo Red staining. Secondly, distinguishing the type of amyloid is important for treatments. Amyloidosis can be classified
clinically into systemic (generalized), with involvement of several organ systems, and organ-limited (localized), in which deposits are
limited to a single organ such as the skin (Table 1) . In the systemic amyloidosis, there are primary, secondary and heredofamilial
amyloidosis. PSA often accompany with multiple myeloma, which can produce light chain protein as one of the precursor protein of
amyloidosis. In this case, treatment of the multiple myeloma is most important to the disease. Thirdly, it is necessary to completely check
on the function of important organs, as sedimentation of amyloid can involve any organs. Kidney is the most sensitive organ (74 %) in PSA,
then the heart (60 %), liver (27 %) and peripheral nervous system (22 %), autonomic nervous system (18 %) . There is about 69 % of the
patients with two organs involvement at least . Gastrointestinal amyloidosis is less common in primary systemic amyloidosis, with only 1 %
incidence in a retrospective review from the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnessota, United States . Many endoscopic features of AL amyloidosis
are not specific to the disease. Findings include thickened folds, erosions, ulcerations, friability, edema and submucosal hematoma . In
other words, it is easy to misdiagnosis without biopsy of the lesion with Congo Red staining. The spectrum of renal symptoms and signs in
amyloidosis is variable such as isolated proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome, hypertension, hypotension, renal insufficiency . In this case, we
did not practice the renal biopsy, as it has been reported that patients of amyloidosis resulted in serious bleeding over renal biopsy
centesis . Moreover, examinations revealed that the patient relied on a solitary right kidney as the left one was congenital dysplasia.Table
1Clinical classification of amyloidosisClinical classification of amyloidosis includingSystemic amyloidosisPrimary systemic
amyloidosis(AL> > AH amyloid protein)Plasma cell dyscrasias (more common)Multiple myeloma-associatedSecondary systemic amyloidosis
(reactive;AA amyloid protein)Chronic inflammation (e.g.rheumatoid arthritis)Chronic infection (e.g.tuberculosis)Heredofamilial amyloidosis
(various amyloid proteins)Familial amyloidotic polyneuropathyFamilial Mediterranean feverOrgan-limited
(localized)amyloidosisCutaneousPrimary:macular, lichen, biphasic, dyschromic, nodularSecondary:within skin tumorsEndocrineMedullary
carcinoma of the thyroid, insulinoma, type 2 diabetesCerebralAlzheimer 's disease Clinical classification of amyloidosis In summary,
clinical manifestations of PSA are diverse and nonspecific. It should be considered in patients with skin lesion such as petechiae, purpura
and ecchymoses, especially accompanying with multisystemic symptoms. Biopsy of lesion with Congo Red staining is of diagnostic significance.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YM conceived of the report, and participated in its design
and coordination, XL drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information Xiu Lin is a graduate
student of Yueping Mao in Sun Yat-Sen University; Yueping Mao is a dermatologist Professor with many years of clinical experience,and got
doctorate in Sun Yat-Sen University. Qing Qi is a Professor of dermatology and dermatopathology. Chuyi Zhang and Yongzhen Tian are also
graduate students. Yanyang Chen is a pathologist of Sun Yat-Sen University. This work was supported by the Department of Dermatopathology of
the Second Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
