A 9-year-old girl with adequate growth and psychomotor development for her age was referred to our emergency service in March 2012 due to
epigastralgia, postprandial vomiting, which started 2 days earlier, and a solid mobile epigastric mass of hard consistency. The patient had
a history of trichophagia and, 2 years before she had been submitted to a laparotomy for removal of a large gastric trichobezoar. The upper
gastrointestinal endoscopy confirmed the diagnosis of gastric trichobezoar. An anterior laparotomy was performed and a solid mass of hair of
12cm x 6cm x 4cm was removed. These dimensions were similar to those of the gastric trichobezoar removed 2 years earlier (Figure 1), in
addition it presented a small tail of hair extending up to the duodenum (Figure 2). We referred the patient to a pediatric psychiatry
consultation and so far she has had favorable progress without recurrent clinical or echographic signs. Figure 1Gastric trichobezoar removed
after the first laparotomy Figure 2Recurrent gastric trichobezoar confirmed by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy Bezoars result from
continuous and prolonged ingestion of indigestible materials leading to their accumulation in lumen of the digestive tube. They are
classified according to their composition.(1,2) Trichobezoars are composed by hair and around 90% occur in women younger than 20 years
old,(3) when found they can be associated with a variety of complications such as intestinal occlusion, gastric perforation, among
others.(4) Recurrence rate in patients who underwent surgery for gastric trichobezoar is unknown. After surgery, these patients must be
referred to a psychiatric consultation and should be regularly evaluated. Patients who do not receive social and psychiatric support after
the first treatment for gastric trichobezoar can present recurrence.(5) Paciente de 9 anos de idade, sexo feminino, com desenvolvimento
estaturoponderal e psicomotor adequados para a idade, foi referenciada ao Serviço de Urgência em março de 2012 por epigastralgia, vômitos
alimentares pós-prandiais com 2 dias de evolução, e massa sólida epigástrica de consistência pétrea e móvel. A paciente tinha história de
tricofagia e, 2 anos antes, tinha sido submetida à laparotomia para remoção de volumoso tricobezoar gástrico. A endoscopia digestiva alta
confirmou a hipótese de diagnóstico de tricobezoar gástrico. Foi realizada nova laparotomia anterior e retirada massa sólida de cabelos com
12cm x 6cm x 4cm, dimensões estas semelhantes às do tricobezoar gástrico removido 2 anos antes (Figura 1), e pequena cauda de cabelos que se
estendia pelo duodeno (Figura 2). Essa paciente foi, então, referenciada a uma consulta de psiquiatria da infância e da adolescência,
apresentando, até a data, evolução favorável, sem evidência clínica ou ecográfica de recidiva. Figura 1Tricobezoar gástrico removido após
primeira laparotomia Figura 2Recidiva de tricobezoar gástrico visualizado em endoscopia digestiva alta Os bezoares resultam da ingestão
continuada e prolongada de materiais não digeridos, levando à sua acumulação no lúmen do tubo digestivo. São classificados de acordo com sua
composição.(1,2) Os tricobezoares são compostos por cabelo ou pelo, ocorrendo cerca de 90% em doentes do sexo feminino com idade inferior a
20 anos.(3) Quando presentes, podem estar associados a inúmeras complicações, como oclusão intestinal, perfuração gástrica ou outras.(4) Na
literatura, não é conhecida a taxa de recorrência em pacientes operados a tricobezoares gástricos. Após cirurgia, esses pacientes devem ser
referenciados a consulta de psiquiatria e serem avaliados regularmente. Pacientes que não recebem apoio social e psiquiátrico após o
primeiro tratamento podem sofrer recidiva.(5)
