A 74-year-old woman, who had undergone spinal fusion with vertebroplasty (polymethylmethacrylate cement injection) for osteoporotic
fractures three years prior, presented with a one-month history of dyspnea on exertion. Her blood pressure was 164/90 mmHg. Her
electrocardiogram was normal, and arterial blood gas analysis showed no hypoxemia. Brain natriuretic peptide and troponin I were normal
(65.5 pg/mL and &lt; 0.01 ng/mL, respectively). Doppler ultrasound of the lower extremities showed no deep vein thrombosis, and
echocardiography showed left ventricular diastolic dysfunction (grade 1) with no right-sided abnormalities. Chest CT showed embolized
polymethylmethacrylate cement in the azygos system and pulmonary arteries (Figures 1 and 2 , respectively). Anticoagulation therapy was
started. Figure 1Axial CT image. White arrows indicate embolized polymethylmethacrylate in the azygos system and pulmonary arteries. Figure
2CT image reconstructed with three-dimensional maximum intensity projection in the sagittal oblique plane (A) and coronal plane (B). White
arrows indicate high attenuation material corresponding to polymethylmethacrylate in the paravertebral venous plexus, extending into the
hemiazygos vein and embolized to pulmonary vessels. Although pulmonary cement embolism (PCE) is a known complication of vertebroplasty, its
exact incidence remains controversial, reportedly ranging from 2.1%, in a retrospective study,1 to 24.0%, in a prospective study.2 In the
former study,1 all PCE patients remained asymptomatic for the first year of follow-up; in the latter,2 most of the emboli were small and
peripheral. However, symptoms can develop, and fatal events have been reported.2 In a systematic review, Krueger et al.3 identified no best
management strategy but concluded that PCE patients with symptomatic peripheral embolisms should receive full anticoagulation for six
months. Uma paciente de 74 anos de idade, submetida à fixação de coluna com vertebroplastia (injeção de cimento de polimetilmetacrilato)
devido a fraturas osteoporóticas há três anos, apresentava história de dispneia aos esforços há um mês. Sua pressão sanguínea era de 164/90
mmHg. Seu eletrocardiograma era normal, e a gasometria arterial não indicou hipoxemia. Os níveis de peptídeo natriurético cerebral e de
troponina I eram normais (65,5 pg/ml e &lt; 0,01 ng/ml, respectivamente). A ultrassonografia com Doppler das extremidades inferiores não
indicou trombose venosa profunda, e a ecocardiografia indicou disfunção diastólica do ventrículo esquerdo (grau 1) sem anormalidades no lado
direito. A TC de tórax mostrou cimento de polimetilmetacrilato embolizado no sistema ázigos e nas artérias pulmonares (Figuras 1 e 2 ,
respectivamente). Foi iniciada a anticoagulação. Figura 1TC axial. As setas brancas indicam o polimetilmetacrilato embolizado no sistema
ázigos e nas artérias pulmonares. Figura 2TC reconstruída com projeção de intensidade máxima tridimensional no plano oblíquo sagital (em A)
e no plano coronal (em B). As setas brancas indicam material de alta atenuação, correspondente ao polimetilmetacrilato no plexo venoso
paravertebral, estendendo-se dentro da veia hemiázigos e embolizado na direção dos vasos pulmonares. Embora a embolia pulmonar por cimento
ósseo (EPCO) seja uma complicação já conhecida da vertebroplastia, sua incidência exata permanece controversa, variando entre 2,1%, em um
estudo retrospectivo,1 e 24,0%, em um estudo prospectivo. 2Segundo o primeiro estudo,1 todos os pacientes com EPCO permaneceram
assintomáticos no primeiro ano de seguimento; o segundo estudo relatou que a maioria dos êmbolos eram pequenos e periféricos.2 Entretanto,
sintomas podem se desenvolver, e já foram descritos eventos fatais.2 Em uma revisão sistemática, Krueger et al.3 não identificaram uma
estratégia de manejo ideal, mas concluíram que os pacientes com EPCO e embolias periféricas sintomáticas deveriam receber anticoagulação
plena por seis meses.
