Figure 1Axial CT slice of the lung bases, showing increased cardiac volume, small right-sided pleural effusion, and dense consolidation in
the lower lobe of the right lung with air bronchogram. The liver parenchyma was also hyperdense (not shown). A 47-year-old male, previously
diagnosed with dilated cardiomyopathy and ventricular tachyarrhythmia, presented with dry cough and progressive dyspnea. Laboratory tests
were normal. A CT of the chest showed a pattern consisting primarily of hyperdense consolidation and cardiomegaly. Consolidation is one of
the most common findings on chest CT. Consolidations often have soft parts (with densities similar to those of the heart and liver). This
finding is nonspecific, being associated with various diseases. Consolidations can be hypodense (indicative of fat), a finding that is
generally characteristic of lipoid pneumonia, or hyperdense (as in the present case). A finding of hyperdense consolidations narrows the
differential diagnosis. Hyperdense consolidations are seen in pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis, parenchymal amyloidosis, talc
pneumoconiosis, metastatic pulmonary calcification, and amiodarone-induced pulmonary toxicity. The differential diagnosis can be made on the
basis of clinical and tomographic characteristics, if those characteristics are evaluated carefully. A striking feature of alveolar
microlithiasis is the dissociation between the clinical and radiological findings, characterized by extensive involvement of the lung
parenchyma in patients who are asymptomatic or only mildly symptomatic. The tomographic patterns that facilitate the diagnosis of alveolar
microlithiasis include small dense nodules, as well as linear calcification along the interlobular septa and pleural surface. In parenchymal
amyloidosis, there is usually a severe clinical profile, accompanied by progressive dyspnea. Nodular thickening of the interlobular septa is
highly indicative of a diagnosis of parenchymal amyloidosis. In talc pneumoconiosis, the tomographic findings can be similar to those seen
in silicosis (small nodules, conglomerate masses, and subpleural nodules). Talc pneumoconiosis is seen in individuals who work in the talc
industry, as well as in injection drug users (after intravenous injection of solutions prepared from tablets containing talc). Metastatic
pulmonary calcification, observed in patients with hypercalcemia, is typically secondary to chronic renal failure or secondary
hyperparathyroidism. It can also be observed in patients with extensive lytic bone lesions. One CT finding that is quite typical of
metastatic pulmonary calcification is that of ill-defined ground-glass, centrilobular nodules with central foci of calcification. Amiodarone
is a drug that is widely used in patients with tachyarrhythmias that are refractory to conventional treatment. The drug contains iodine and
tends to accumulate in multiple organs, including the liver and lungs. Amiodarone-induced pulmonary toxicity is one of the serious adverse
effects of its use. The tomographic findings that can suggest a diagnosis of amiodarone-induced pulmonary toxicity are cardiomegaly and a
hypodense liver. In patients known to have been exposed to amiodarone, tomographic findings of dense consolidations in combination with a
dense liver are diagnostic of the condition, precluding the need for a lung biopsy. Figura 1TC com corte axial das bases pulmonares
mostrando aumento do volume cardíaco, pequeno derrame pleural à direita e consolidação densa no lobo inferior do pulmão direito, com
broncograma aéreo. O parênquima hepático era também hiperdenso (não mostrado). Homem de 47 anos, com diagnóstico de miocardiopatia dilatada
e taquiarritmia ventricular, apresentou um quadro de tosse seca e dispneia progressiva. Os exames laboratoriais eram normais. O paciente
apresenta basicamente um padrão de consolidação com densidade elevada e cardiomegalia. Consolidação é um dos achados mais comuns em TC de
tórax. As consolidações frequentemente têm densidade de partes moles (semelhante à densidade do coração ou fígado). Esse achado é pouco
específico, tendo como causa várias doenças. Consolidações podem também ter densidade negativa (gordura), achado em geral característico de
pneumonia lipoídica, ou ter densidade elevada (como no caso apresentado). Nas consolidações com densidade aumentada, o diagnóstico
diferencial é mais restrito. As doenças que cursam com essa alteração são microlitíase alveolar pulmonar, amiloidose parenquimatosa,
talcose, calcificação pulmonar metastática e impregnação por amiodarona. Características clínicas e tomográficas, avaliadas criteriosamente,
podem fazer o diagnóstico diferencial. Na microlitíase alveolar, a dissociação clínico-radiológica chama a atenção, caracterizada por
comprometimento extenso do parênquima pulmonar em paciente oligo ou assintomático. Padrões tomográficos associados que ajudam no diagnóstico
são pequenos nódulos densos e calcificações lineares ao longo de septos interlobulares e da superfície pleural. A amiloidose parenquimatosa,
em geral, se apresenta com quadro clínico grave, acompanhado de dispneia progressiva. O achado de espessamento nodular de septos
interlobulares auxilia no diagnóstico. A talcose pode apresentar achados tomográficos associados semelhantes aos da silicose (pequenos
nódulos, massas conglomeradas e nódulos subpleurais). Clinicamente é observada em pacientes que trabalham na indústria do talco ou em
usuários de drogas, através de injeção endovenosa de comprimidos que contém talco em sua composição. A calcificação pulmonar metastática é
observada em pacientes com hipercalcemia, em geral secundária a insuficiência renal crônica ou a hiperparatireoidismo secundário. Pode ser
observada também em pacientes com extensas lesões ósseas líticas. Na TC, um achado associado muito típico é o de nódulos centrolobulares em
vidro fosco, mal definidos, com focos centrais de calcificação. A amiodarona é uma droga amplamente utilizada para o tratamento de
taquiarritmias refratárias. A droga contém iodo em sua composição e tende a se acumular em múltiplos órgãos, incluindo fígado e parênquima
pulmonar. A impregnação por amiodarona é um dos efeitos adversos mais sérios do uso da droga. Aspectos tomográficos associados que podem
sugerir o diagnóstico são cardiomegalia e/ou fígado com densidade aumentada. A associação de consolidação densa com fígado denso em paciente
que sabidamente faz uso da droga é diagnóstica e dispensa a realização de biópsia pulmonar.
