Urethral tumors are rare and aggressive. They usually affect men (2:1) and occur more commonly in white (85% of cases). Soft tissue sarcomas
are a heterogeneous group of tumors that arise from embryonic mesoderm. It represents 1% of all cases of urinary tract malignancies and
rarely primary affect the ureter. We report a case of male urethral sarcoma. To date, only two similar cases have been published in
literature. Urethral tumors are rare and aggressive, they occur more frequently in men (2:1) and often affect whites (85% of cases).1,2
Approximately 600 cases of urethral cancer in men are reported in the world literature. The epidermoid carcinoma is the most common
histological type (80% of cases), followed by transitional cell cancer (15%) and adenocarcinomas (5%). The most affected local is
bulbomembranous urethra followed by penile and prostatic urethra.2 Urethral cancer is often diagnosed between the age of 50-79 years.2,3 The
disease has an unspecific presentation and, according to some case series reported, the most common symptoms are hematuria, dysuria, urinary
retention and urinary incontinence.4 Soft tissue sarcomas constitute a heterogenous group of tumors that appear in the embryonic mesoderm
and account for 1 to 2% of all malignant disease of the urinary tract.5 In general sarcomas most common forms are liposarcoma, malignant
histiocytoma and leiomyosarcoma.6 The most frequent types of genitourinary sarcomas are leiomyosarcoma, liposarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma.6
We report a case of sarcoma of the male urethra that, so far, only two similar cases have been reported in the literature.7,8 We report a
case of 73-year-old white man with history of myocardial infarction (MI), which occurred 3 years earlier, and who was diagnosed with
systemic arterial hypertension. He was not a smoker and did not consume alcohol. The patient’s complain was macroscopic hematuria that
started intermittent and then continuing that lasted for 1 year. At physical examination no visceromegaly or lymphadenomegaly was observed.
The urological exam showed urethrorrhagia without sings of macroscopic lesions. Rectal examination revealed a 30g prostate without
nodularity and painless. Patient had normal blood count and coagulogram, early-onset chronic renal failure (urea was 49mg/dL and creatinine
was 1.5mg/dL). Total abdominal ultrasound was normal and pelvis examination with contrast showed an extensive injury in posterior urethra
that invaded the prostate, bladder and perivesical tissue (Figure 1), but no changes were seen in the upper urinary tract or distant
metastasis. The cystoscopy showed a brown injury in the posterior urethra (membranous and prostatic). A biopsy was performed and the result
revealed a mesenchymal neoplasia with myxoid degeneration area and high mitotic index. Figure 1Nuclear magnetic ressonance of the pelvis
showing the urethral tumor (arrow) The patient underwent a cystoprostatectomy with removal of the testicles, pelvic lymphadenectomy and
ureteroileostomy using the Bricker method (Figure 2). After the procedure the patient had a good progress, recovery of physiological
functions and adequate diuresis. However, on the 10th postoperative day he died after a new episode of MI. Figure 2Posterior urethral
sarcoma (indicated with arrows). Thickening and hardening of the affected area The anatomopathological study showed a high histological
degree pleomorphic sarcoma, measuring approximately 20.0cm, in the bulbar urethra with neoplasia affecting the bladder base, periprostatic
region, seminal vesicles, base of the penis and cavernous bodies (Figure 3). The urethral tumor had high cellularity, high mitotic index,
30% necrosis of tumor volume and intense anaplastic effect. The perivescial surgical margins and the right ureter was compromised. The left
urethral margin was free of malignancy. No metastasis was observed in 15 dissected lymph nodes in the pelvic lymphadenectomy. Mesenchymal
cells vimentin and desmin were positive in the immunohistochemical analysis, but other markers such as cytokeratin, S-100, CD 117, CD 30, CD
20, CD 3 and CD 56 were negative. This finding excluded other origins such as epithelial, hematological and neural tumors. Figure 3(A) High
degree urethral sarcoma; (B) Immunohistochemical analysis that revealed strong positivity of vimentin; (C) Urethral tumor also showing
positivity for desmin Survival rates of patients with genitourinary sarcomas is worse compared with other soft tissue regions.9 Prognosis is
relatively poor and can be explained by the high proportion seen in high degree tumors, large proportion of patients with metastatic
disease, large tumor and the area affected. In addition, the rarity and heterogeneity of genitourinary sarcomas can explain the great
variability in clinical progress in different subgroups.10 Dissemination of urethral cancer follows the anatomic subdivision. The anterior
urethra has a lymphatic drainage system for superficial and deep inguinal region. Posterior urethra drains the lymphatic ganglion of
external iliac artery, hypo gastric, and internal obturator muscle.10 Late diagnosis is seen in one third of patients with inguinal
lymphatic ganglion metastasis and in 20% of those with pelvic ganglion metastasis. The most common distant metastasis appears in lungs,
liver and bones.10 Anterior tumors present better prognosis reaching up to 60% in 5 years. Tumors <2cm have 81% of survival for 5 years. On
the other hand, tumors of posterior urethra have 10% survival rate for 5 years if <2cm, 37% of survival for 5 years when presenting tumors 2
to 4cm and only 7% when >4cm. In general, in a stage higher than T2 the survival rate for 5 years is observed in <26%.10 Histological
characteristics of genito-urinary sarcomas are quite variable. Most of them present high degree of differentiation and isolated focus of
squamous metaplasia.10 To date, only two cases of sarcoma of the male urethra have been described in the literature. The first cases was a
78-year-old man with ulcerative injury in urethra.7 The second was a 65-year-old man who underwent a perineal uretrostomy to treat a distal
urethral stenosis 8(Chart 1). Chart 1Case reported in the literature about sarcoma of the male urethraPatientAge
(years)LocalSizeTreatmentProgress1o patient(7) 78Posterior urethraNot evaluatedVesical drainageNot evaluated2o patient(8) 65Bulbar
urethra6cmPelvic exenteration, chemotherapy and adjuvant radiotherapyDeath after 7 months The main treatment for urethral cancer is surgical
excision. Anterior urethral cancer has a better surgical control and prognosis than the posterior urethral that often present association
with local invasion and distant extensive metastasis.2 More conservative procedures can be acceptable in selected cases with superficial
injuries, papillary tumors or low degree tumors.2 In case of infiltrating tumors of sponge’s body located in distal half of the penis, the
partial penectomy can be a treatment option.2 If the disease is invasive, extending for more than half of the penile urethra, the
radiotherapy can be a treatment option for unresectable lesions.2 Radiotherapy and chemotherapy can be applied to tumors located in
bulbocavernosus urethra even for those occurring in the prostatic urethra. In cases of advanced injuries, the treatment applied is extensive
surgery with chemotherapy and adjuvant radiotherapy. The isolated chemotherapy is the only option for cases of extensive metastasis.2 In our
case the diagnosis was advanced urethral sarcoma (T4N0M0), with positive surgical margin in a clinically severe patient with cardiomyopathy
that led to an unfavorable outcome. The MI presented by the patient in early postoperative period did not enable the adjuvant therapy with
radiotherapy and chemotherapy. It becomes clear that these tumors are extremely aggressive and have poor prognosis. Os tumores de uretra são
muito raros e bastante agressivos. Acometem mais frequentemente homens (2:1) e são mais comuns na raça branca (85% dos casos). Os sarcomas
de tecidos moles são um grupo heterogêneo de tumores que surgem a partir da mesoderme embrionária e representam 1% de todos os casos de
doença maligna urinária, raramente acometendo a uretra primariamente. Relamos aqui um caso extremamente raro de sarcoma uretral masculino
com somente dois semelhantes publicados na literatura. Os tumores de uretra são muito raros e bastante agressivos. Acometem mais
frequentemente homens (2:1) e são mais comuns na raça branca (85% dos casos).1,2 São relatados aproximadamente 600 casos de câncer uretral
masculino na literatura mundial. O carcinoma epidermoide é o tipo histológico mais comum (80% dos casos), seguido do carcinoma de células
transicionais (15%) e dos adenocarcinomas (5%). O local mais acometido é a uretra bulbomembranosa, seguida da uretra peniana e prostática.2
A faixa etária do diagnóstico de tumor uretral maligno é de 50 a 79 anos.2,3 A doença tem apresentação inicial inespecífica e, de acordo com
algumas séries de casos relatados, os sintomas mais comuns são hematúria, disúria, retenção urinária e incontinência urinária.4 Os sarcomas
de tecidos moles são um grupo heterogêneo de tumores que surgem a partir da mesoderme embrionária, que representa 1 a 2% de todos os casos
de doença maligna urinária.5 Os sarcomas, em geral, possuem como formas mais comum o lipossarcoma, seguido do histiocitoma maligno e do
leiomiossarcoma.6 Em relação aos sarcomas geniturinários, o tipo mais frequente é o leiomiossarcoma, seguido do lipossarcoma e do
rabdomiossarcoma.6 Relatamos e discutimos aqui um caso de sarcoma de uretra masculino, que, por sua raridade, tem apenas dois casos
relatados.7,8 Paciente de 73 anos, do sexo masculino, raça branca, com história de infarto agudo do miocárdico (IAM) há 3 anos e diagnóstico
de hipertensão arterial sistêmica, sem história de tabagismo e etilismo. Apresentou-se com queixa de hematúria macroscópica, inicialmente
intermitente e, posteriormente, contínua, de início há 1 ano. No exame físico, não foram notadas visceromegalias ou linfonodomegalias. Ao
exame urológico, notou-se uretrorragia, sem sinais de lesões macroscópicas. O toque retal revelou próstata de 30g sem nódulos, indolor. O
paciente apresentava hemograma e coagulograma normais, função renal com doença renal crônica incipiente (ureia 49mg/dL e creatinina
1,5mg/dL). O ultrassom de abdome total era normal, porém a ressonância nuclear magnética de abdome e pelve com contraste evidenciou lesão
extensa em uretra posterior, que invadia próstata, bexiga e tecido perivesical (Figura 1), sem alteração de trato urinário alto ou
metástases a distância. A uretrocistoscopia demonstrou lesão acastanhada na uretra posterior (membranosa e prostática), que, submetida à
biópsia, demonstrou neoplasia de padrão mesenquimal, com áreas de degeneração mixoide e alto índice mitótico. Figura 1Ressonância nuclear
magnética de pelve demonstrando tumor acometendo uretra (seta) O paciente foi submetido à cistoprostatectomia com emasculação,
linfadenectomia pélvica e ureteroileostomia à Bricker (Figura 2). Apresentava boa evolução com recuperação das funções fisiológicas e
diurese adequada; todavia, apresentou novo episódio de IAM no 10o dia pós-operatório evoluindo a óbito. Figura 2Sarcoma da uretra posterior
(indicado pelas setas). Clinicamente, notavam-se espessamento e endurecimento da região acometida O estudo anatomopatológico evidenciou
sarcoma pleomórfico de uretra bulbar de alto grau histológico, com neoplasia acometendo base de bexiga, região periprostática, vesículas
seminais, base de pênis e corpos cavernosos, com maior diâmetro aproximado de 20,0cm (Figura 3). O tumor uretral apresentou alta
celularidade, alto índice mitótico, necrose em 30% do volume tumoral e intensa anaplasia. Margens cirúrgicas perivesical e ureteral direita
comprometidas. Margem ureteral esquerda livre. Ausência de metástases para 15 linfonodos dissecados na linfadenectomia ilíaca. Na imuno-
histoquímica, as pesquisas para os marcadores mesenquimais desmina e vimentina vieram positivos, enquanto pesquisas de outros marcadores,
como citoqueratina, S-100, CD 117, CD 30, CD 20, CD 3 e CD 56, foram negativos, excluindo outras origens como epitelial, hematológica e
tumores neurais. Figura 3(A) Sarcoma uretral de alto grau; (B) Imuno-histoquímica que revelou forte positividade de vimentina; (C) O tumor
uretral também apresentava positividade para desmina A taxa de sobrevivência de doentes com sarcoma de geniturinário é pior em relação
àqueles com sarcoma de tecidos moles em outras localizações.9 O prognóstico relativamente pobre pode ser explicado pela maior proporção de
tumores de grau elevado, a maior proporção de pacientes que se apresentam com doença metastática, um maior tamanho tumoral e o local
anatômico. Além disso, a raridade e a heterogeneidade dos sarcomas geniturinários podem significar grandes diferenças de evolução clínica
nos vários subgrupos.10 As vias de disseminação do carcinoma uretral seguem sua subdivisão anatômica. A uretra anterior possui drenagem
linfática para região inguinal superficial e profunda. A uretra posterior drena para os gânglios linfáticos da artéria ilíaca externa e
hipogástrica, e do músculo obturador interno.10 Em um terço dos pacientes, o diagnóstico é tardio, com metástases para gânglios linfáticos
inguinais, e em 20% para os gânglios pélvicos. Os locais de metástases a distância mais comum são pulmão, fígado e ossos.10 Os tumores
anteriores são de melhor prognóstico, chegando a 60% em 5 anos. Os tumores <2cm têm sobrevida de 81% em 5 anos. Em contrapartida, tumores da
uretra posterior possuem taxa de 10% de sobrevida em 5 anos se <2cm, 37% de sobrevida em 5 anos quando de 2 a 4cm de tamanho e apenas 7%
quando >4cm. Acima do estádio T2, costumam apresentar uma taxa de sobrevida <26% em 5 anos.10 As características histológicas dos sarcomas
urinários são bastante variadas. A maioria contém alto grau de diferenciação com focos isolados de metaplasia escamosa.10 Em relação aos
sarcomas de uretra masculina, somente dois casos foram descritos na literatura. O primeiro caso é de um homem de 78 anos com uma lesão
ulcerada na uretra.7O segundo foi de um homem de 65 anos com uretrostomia perineal para tratamento de estenose uretral distal8(Quadro 1).
Quadro 1Casos relatados na literatura de sarcoma de uretra no sexo masculinoPacienteIdade (anos)LocalizaçãoTamanhoTratamentoEvolução1o
paciente(7) 78Uretra posteriorNão avaliadoDrenagem vesicalNão avaliado2o paciente(8) 65Uretra bulbar6cmExanteração pélvica, quimioterapia e
radioterapia adjuvanteÓbito após 7 meses A principal forma de tratamento é a excisão cirúrgica. O carcinoma de uretra anterior possui melhor
controle cirúrgico e melhor prognóstico em relação ao da uretra posterior, que apresenta frequente associação de invasão local e extensa
metástase a distância.2 Procedimentos mais conservadores podem ser aceitáveis em doentes selecionados com lesões superficiais, tumores
papilares ou de baixo grau.2No caso de tumores infiltrantes do corpo esponjoso localizados em metade distal do pênis, pode-se tentar uma
penectomia parcial.2Se a doença for invasiva, estendendo-se por mais da metade da uretra peniana, a penectomia total é necessária.2
Radioterapia e quimioterapia são opções como tratamento primário ou de forma adjuvante. Em tumores localizados na uretra peniana, a
radioterapia entra como tratamento opcional em lesões irressecáveis. Naqueles localizados na uretra bulbo-carvenosa, a radioterapia e a
quimioterapia neoadjuvante podem ser realizadas, o mesmo ocorrendo em tumores localizados na uretra prostática. Em casos de lesões
avançadas, o tratamento realizado é cirurgia extensa com quimioterapia e radioterapia adjuvante e, nos casos com metástase extensa,
quimioterapia isolada é a única opção.2 No caso apresentado, o diagnóstico era de sarcoma uretral avançado (T4N0M0), com margem cirúrgica
positiva em um paciente com miocardiopatia clinicamente grave, resultando em desfecho desfavorável. O IAM apresentado pelo paciente no
período pós-operatório precoce inviabilizou o tratamento adjuvante com radioterapia e quimioterapia. Fica evidente que esses tumores são
extremamente agressivos e de mau prognóstico.
