The technique of a single-port laparoscopy was developed over the last years as an attempt to lower surgical aggression and improve the
aesthetic results of the minimally invasive surgery. A new robotic platform used with the da Vinci® Robotic System Single-Site System®
(Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, California, United States) was recently launched on the global market and is still not documented in Brazil.
The authors report on the first four robotic single-port cholecystectomies performed with this da Vinci® Robotic System in Brazil.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy, initially introduced in 1986, was the major landmark of minimally invasive surgery in the area of digestive
tract surgery over the last years. Currently, laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the gold standard surgery in treating cholecystopathies,(1) in
addition to diseases with indication for gallbladder removal. On the other hand, SILS – single-incision laparoscopic surgery – is a recent
technological advance in minimally invasive surgery. It was developed as a less invasive alternative to conventional laparoscopy.(2) It uses
a single 2 to 2.5cm incision for its performance, without the need for multiple punctures. The first laparoscopic cholecystectomy by single
port was done by Navarra, in 1997.(3) Despite the promising results published in literature, there were significant hindrances reported for
this approach, such as difficulty in pulling the gallbladder, in maintaining the dissection precise and delicate, and maintaining critical
visibility.(4,5) Other studies also reported a greater incidence of biliary tract lesions in these procedures, due to the great difficulty
in dissecting the cystic duct and artery because of collision of forceps.(4,5) Consequently, the acceptance and use of SILS are still
controversial. In this way, over the last five years, the Robotic da Vinci® Single-Site System® (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, California,
United States), was developed. In it, there is inversion of the instruments with no need for great effort on the part of the surgeon,
allowing wider movements and better ergonomics, when compared to non-robotic single-port laparoscopic operations.(1) In addition to three-
dimension visualization, the position of the surgeon sitting next to the patient, at the robot console, and the precision in dissection of
the anatomical structures, allow a more precise surgery, without forceps collisions. The initial studies demonstrated that this technique is
safe and effective, and can help resolve the technical limitations found in laparoscopy.(1,2) Robotic surgery presents a stable perspective,
arm movements linked by computerized inversion, and instruments that allow a high degree of freedom.(1,5,6) This study shows the first four
cases of surgery using the robotic Single-Site System for gallbladder removal. On July 9, 2014, in an unprecedented way in Brazil, four
patients were submitted to single-port cholecystectomy using the platform da Vinci® Single-Site. The patients were operated on by two
surgeons, ALVM and VS, two cases each, at Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein. The demographic data of patients included age, body mass
index, prior operations, and clinical diagnosis. The data analyzed were operative time, skin incision, trochanter placement, docking
(coupling time between the robot and the patient), time on the console, and length of hospital stay. Single-port robotic cholecystectomy is
performed using the da Vinci® Single-Site. The patient is placed in supine position under general anesthesia. A 2.5cm umbilical incision is
made with dissection to the peritoneal cavity. The da Vinci® Single-Site port is placed and pneumoperitoneum is initiated. The patient is
placed in an inclined position with slight left lateral decubitus. The robot is place over the patient’s right shoulder. After introduction
of the camera, the trochanters are placed under direct view. Next, docking (coupling with the robot) takes place and the fundus of the
gallbladder is pulled towards the patient’s right shoulder by the assistant (Figure 1). The triangle of Calot is exposed. Dissection is
performed with the robotic hook-type forceps and Maryland-type robotic forceps. After identification of the cystic duct and the cystic
artery, both structures are clipped with the Hem-o-lock® (Teleflex Medical, Ireland) and sectioned with scissors. The gallbladder is
detached from the hepatic bed with the robotic hook. Hemostasis is conducted with bipolar forceps or robotic hook. The robotic instruments
and the camera are removed, and the robot is disengaged. The piece is removed together with the single-port, after review of hemostasis of
the hepatic bed. The wound is closed by layers and the skin in sutured with intradermal stitches (Figure 2). Figure 1Position of the robot,
port, and assistant during the surgery Figure 2Final aspect of the abdomen after closing of the single orifice All cases were concluded
without complications with the da Vinci® SI platform. All patients presented with cholelithiasis as diagnosis for surgical indication, and
none of them presented with acute cholecystitis or signs of gallbladder tumor. In 50% of cases, patients had prior operations, and the
greatest difficulty was in the adhesions around the gallbladder. In these cases, we noted a prolonged time on the console, due to the
difficulty in detaching adhesions with the robotic single-port forceps. There were no complications, such as biliary tract lesion, bleeding,
or need for reoperation. ESP, 72-year-old male, acute biliary pancreatitis, resolved. Discharged on the first postoperative day. DMFSM,
67-year-old female, diabetic, obese, prior hiatal hernioplasty. Discharged on the first postoperative day. EEB, 49- year-old male,
overweight. Discharged on the first postoperative day. DC, 39 year-old male, overweight. Discharged on the first postoperative day. All
procedures were concluded with the robotic single-port device. The demographic data of patients are summarized on table 1. Table
1Demographic dataVariablesValuesAge (mean)56.7Male (%)75BMI (kg/m2), mean27.0Prior abdominal surgery2BMI: body mass index. BMI: body mass
index. Operative results are shown on table 2. Table 2Operative dataVariablesValuesTime of anesthesia (minute), mean116Docking
(minute)32.5Operative time on console (minute), mean39.7Length of hospital stay (hour), mean17 Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has been
performed for more than 20 years and it represents the gold standard for treatment of cholelithiasis all over the world. During the last few
years, minimally invasive technology took an important step in its evolution, enabling, besides conventional laparoscopic surgery, the
operation with a single port. Since its introduction, SILS has not been used as routine, primarily due to physical limitations of this
technology, which compromises triangulation, ergonomics of the procedure, and quality of the view, leading to difficulty in exposing the
anatomical structures and to increased risk of lesions to the biliary tract.(5) The introduction of robotic cholecystectomy by a single port
set a new landmark for SILS. The curved trochanters of the robotic system were designed to decrease the problem of triangulation and the
single-port with entrance for the auxiliary forceps was made for traction of the gallbladder, with no need for percutaneous sutures.(7)
However, in a systematic review by Antoniou et al.,(8) 29 studies of non-robotic SILS cholecystectomies were reviewed, including 1,166
patients, and a significant increase in the mean rate of complications was identified in cases where the gallbladder was resected, as
compared to the mean complication rates reported in videolaparoscopic cholecystectomy. In this way, the search began for technologies that
might allow the operation by a single orifice with safety, precision, and low rate of complications. Initially introduced in the United
States about three years ago, the robotic da Vinci® Single-Site platform was introduced in Brazil, in 2014. In this study, we present the
first four cases of single-port robotic cholecystectomy performed in Brazil. According to the initial results, the procedure seems safe and
viable, having been concluded without conversions and with no postoperative complications. The advantages of the robotic single port
approach are better esthetic results, less postoperative pain due to the small single incision, visualization of the anatomical structures
in three dimensions, stability of the instruments by the robotic platform, precision in dissections, and greater ease for the surgeon in
concluding dissections made difficult by the single port. Additionally, the curved robotic semi-rigid instruments provide a safe platform
for the performance of the procedures and overcome restrictions and limitations, when compared to laparoscopy via a single port.(1,5)
Despite the fact that this study presents a small number of patients operated on, it demonstrates the feasibility of the method and
indicates the future possibility of adopting this method as gold standard in elective cholecystectomy, as is described in large reference
centers for advanced surgery in the world.(5,6) Single-port robotic surgery is feasible and safe when performed by surgeons with prior
experience in robotic surgery. Studies with large series of cases are necessary to establish the superiority of the single-port robotic
procedure as compared to the single-incision laparoscopic surgery and videolaparoscopic cholecystectomy. A técnica de um único portal
laparoscópico foi desenvolvida ao longo dos últimos anos, numa tentativa de diminuir a agressão cirúrgica e melhorar ainda mais os
resultados estéticos da cirurgia minimamente invasiva. Uma nova plataforma robótica, usada com o Sistema Robótico da Vinci® Single-Site
System ® (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, Califórnia, Estados Unidos), foi recentemente lançada no mercado mundial e é ainda inédita no
Brasil. Os autores relatam as primeiras quatro colecistectomias robóticas com portal único realizadas com este Sistema Robótico da Vinci® no
Brasil. A colecistectomia laparoscópica inicialmente introduzida em 1986 foi o principal marco da cirurgia minimamente invasiva na área de
cirurgia do aparelho digestivo nos últimos anos. Atualmente, a colecistectomia laparoscópica é a cirurgia padrão-ouro no tratamento das
colecistopatias,(1) além de doenças com indicação de remoção da vesícula biliar. Por outro lado, a cirurgia de incisão única laparoscópica
(single-incision laparoscopic surgery - SILS) é um recente avanço tecnológico em cirurgia minimamente invasiva. Foi desenvolvida como uma
alternativa menos invasiva à laparoscopia convencional.(2) Trata-se de uma incisão única de cerca de 2 a 2,5cm para a realização de
cirurgias laparoscópicas sem a necessidade de se realizarem punções múltiplas. A primeira colecistectomia laparoscópica por portal único foi
feita por Navarra, em 1997.(3) Apesar dos resultados promissores publicados na literatura, foram relatadas dificuldades significativas dessa
abordagem, como dificuldade para tracionar a vesícula biliar, dificuldade em se manter a dissecção precisa e delicada, e a manutenção da
visão crítica.(4,5) Outros trabalhos ainda relatam a maior incidência de lesão da via biliar nesses procedimentos, devido à grande
dificuldade em se dissecarem o ducto e a artéria cística, oriunda da colisão das pinças.(4,5) Como consequência, a aceitação e o uso da SILS
permanecem controversos. Desse modo, foi desenvolvido, nos últimos 5 anos, o Sistema Robótico da Vinci® Single-Site System ® (Intuitive
Surgical, Sunnyvale, Califórnia, Estados Unidos). Nele, ocorre a inversão dos instrumentos sem necessidade de grande esforço por parte do
cirurgião, permitindo movimentos mais amplos e uma melhor ergonomia, quando comparado às cirurgias laparoscópicas não robóticas, de portal
único.(1) Além da visualização tridimensional, o posicionamento do cirurgião, ao lado do paciente, no console do robô, e a precisão na
dissecção das estruturas anatômicas permitem uma cirurgia mais precisa e sem colisões de pinças. Estudos iniciais demonstraram que essa
técnica é segura e eficaz, podendo ajudar a resolver as limitações técnicas encontradas na laparoscopia.(1,2) A cirurgia robótica apresenta
uma ótica estável, movimentos dos braços ligados por inversão informatizada e instrumentos que proporcionam um elevado grau de
liberdade.(1,5,6) Este trabalho apresenta os quatro primeiros casos de cirurgia usando o Single-SiteSystem robótico para remoção da vesícula
biliar. Em 9/7/2014, de modo inédito no Brasil, quatro pacientes foram submetidos à colecistectomia por portal único, com a plataforma da
Vinci® Single-Site. Os casos foram operados por dois cirurgiões, ALVM e VS, dois casos cada um, no Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein. Os
dados demográficos dos pacientes considerados foram idade, índice de massa corporal, cirurgias anteriores e diagnóstico clínico. Os dados
analisados foram: tempo operatório, incisão da pele, colocação de trocânteres, docking (tempo de acoplamento do robô ao paciente), tempo no
console e tempo de internação. A colecistectomia robótica por portal único é realizada com o da Vinci® Single-Site. O paciente é colocado em
posição supina sob anestesia geral. É feita uma incisão umbilical de 2,5cm e realizada a dissecção até a cavidade peritoneal. O portal da
Vinci® Single-Site é colocado e o pneumoperitônio é iniciado. O paciente é posicionado em proclive e com um leve decúbito lateral esquerdo.
O robô é colocado sobre o ombro direito do paciente. Após a introdução da câmera, os trocânteres são colocados sob visão direta. É realizado
o docking (acoplamento do robô), e o fundo da vesícula biliar é tracionado em direção ao ombro direito do paciente pelo assistente (Figura
1). O triângulo de Calot é exposto. A dissecção é realizada com pinça robótica tipo gancho e uma pinça robótica tipo Maryland. Após a
identificação do ducto cístico e da artéria cística, ambas as estruturas são clipadas com Hem-o-lock® (Teleflex Medical, Irlanda) e
seccionados com tesoura. A vesícula biliar é descolada do leito hepático com o gancho robótico. A hemostasia é realizada com pinça bipolar
ou gancho robótico. Os instrumentos robóticos e a câmera são retirados, e o robô é desencaixado. A retirada da peça é feita em conjunto com
a retirada do portal único, após a revisão da hemostasia do leito hepático. Realiza-se o fechamento por planos, e é feita a síntese da pele
com pontos intradérmicos (Figura 2). Figura 1Disposição do robô, portal e assistente durante a cirurgia Figura 2Aspecto final do abdômen
apos fechamento do orifício único Todos os casos foram concluídos sem intercorrências com a plataforma da Vinci® SI. Todos os pacientes
apresentavam colelitíase como diagnóstico de indicação cirúrgica, e nenhum deles apresentava colecistite aguda ou indícios de tumor de
vesícula biliar. Em 50% dos casos, os pacientes tinham cirurgia prévia, e a dificuldade maior consistiu nas aderências ao redor da vesícula
biliar. Nesses casos, observamos um tempo prolongado no console, devido à dificuldade da lise de aderências com as pinças do single port
robótico. Nenhum caso teve qualquer tipo de complicação, como lesão de via biliar, sangramento ou necessidade de reabordagem cirúrgica. ESP,
72 anos, sexo masculino, pancreatite aguda biliar resolvida. Alta no primeiro pós-operatório. DMFSM, 67 anos, sexo feminino, diabética,
obesa, hernioplastia hiatal prévia. Alta no primeiro pós-operatório. EEB, 49 anos, sexo masculino, sobrepeso. Alta no primeiro pós-
operatório. DC, 39 anos, sexo masculino, sobrepeso. Alta no primeiro pós-operatório. Todos os procedimentos foram concluídos com o portal
único robótico. Os dados demográficos dos pacientes estão resumidos na tabela 1. Tabela 1Dados demográficosVariáveisValoresIdade
(média)56,7Sexo masculino (%)75IMC (kg/m2), média27,0Cirurgia prévia abdominal2IMC: índice de massa corporal. Os resultados operatórios são
mostrados na tabela 2. Tabela 2Dados operatóriosVariáveisValoresTempo de anestesia (minuto), média116 Docking (minuto)32,5Tempo cirúrgico no
console (minuto), média39,7Tempo de internação (hora), média17 A colecistectomia laparoscópica tem sido realizada há mais de 20 anos e
representa o tratamento padrão-ouro para a colelitíase em todo o mundo. Durante os últimos anos, a tecnologia minimamente invasiva deu um
passo importante em sua evolução, possibilitando, além da cirurgia laparoscópica convencional, a cirurgia com portal único. Desde sua
introdução, a SILS não foi realizada de rotina, principalmente devido a limitações físicas dessa tecnologia, que comprometem triangulação,
ergonomia do procedimento e a qualidade de visão, levando à dificuldade de exposição das estruturas anatômicas e ao risco aumentado de lesão
da via biliar.(5) A introdução da colecistectomia robótica por portal único criou um novo marco para SILS. Os trocânteres curvos do sistema
robótico foram desenhados para diminuir o problema da triangulação e o portal único com entrada para pinça de auxílio foi feito para tração
da vesícula biliar, sem necessidade de suturas percutâneas.(7) Porém, em uma revisão sistemática de Antoniou et al.,(8) foram analisados 29
estudos de colecistectomias SILS não robóticas, incluindo 1.166 pacientes, e foi identificado um aumento significativo da taxa média de
complicações nos casos em que foram realizadas ressecção da vesícula biliar, em relação às médias históricas de complicações de
colecistectomia videolaparoscópicas. Desse modo, deu-se início à procura de tecnologias que pudessem permitir a realização de cirurgia por
orifício único com segurança, precisão e com baixo índice de complicações. Inicialmente introduzida nos Estados Unidos, há cerca de 3 anos,
a plataforma robótica da Vinci® Single-Site foi introduzida no Brasil em 2014. Apresentamos, neste trabalho, os quatro primeiros casos de
colecistectomia robótica por portal único realizados no Brasil. Pelos resultados iniciais, o procedimento parece ser seguro e factível,
sendo concluído sem conversões e sem complicações no pós-operatório. As vantagens do portal único robótico são melhores resultados
estéticos, diminuição da dor pós-operatória devido à pequena incisão única, visualização das estruturas anatômicas em três dimensões,
estabilidade dos instrumentos pela plataforma robótica, precisão nas dissecções e maior facilidade ao cirurgião em concluir dissecções
dificultadas pelo portal único. Além disso, os instrumentos semirrígidos curvos robóticos fornecem uma plataforma segura para a realização
dos procedimentos e superam as restrições e limitações, quando comparados à laparoscopia por portal único.(1,5) Apesar deste trabalho
apresentar ainda um pequeno número de pacientes operados, ele demonstra a factibilidade do método e indica a possibilidade futura de adotar
essa técnica como padrão-ouro em colecistectomia eletiva, assim como descrito em grandes centros de referência em cirurgia avançada no
mundo.(5,6) A cirurgia robótica por portal único é factível e segura, quando realizada por cirurgiões com experiência em cirurgia robótica
prévia. Estudos com grandes séries são necessários, a fim de se estabelecer a superioridade do single port robótico frente a single-incision
laparoscopic surgery e a colecistectomia videolaparoscópica.
