Purpose: Cognitive impairment may occur in 42–50% of cardiac arrest survivors. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBO2) has recently been shown to
have neurotherapeutic effects in patients suffering from chronic cognitive impairments (CCI) consequent to stroke and mild traumatic brain
injury. The objective of this study was to assess the neurotherapeutic effect of HBO2 in patients suffering from CCI due to cardiac arrest.
Methods: Retrospective analysis of patients with CCI caused by cardiac arrest, treated with 60 daily sessions of HBO2. Evaluation included
objective computerized cognitive tests (NeuroTrax), Activity of Daily Living (ADL) and Quality of life questionnaires. The results of these
tests were compared with changes in brain activity as assessed by single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) brain imaging. Results:
The study included 11 cases of CCI patients. Patients were treated with HBO2, 0.5–7.5 years (mean 2.6 ± 0.6 years) after the cardiac arrest.
HBO2 was found to induce modest, but statistically significant improvement in memory, attention and executive function (mean scores) of 12%
, 20% and 24% respectively. The clinical improvements were found to be well correlated with increased brain activity in relevant brain areas
as assessed by computerized analysis of the SPECT imaging. Conclusions: Although further research is needed, the results demonstrate the
beneficial effects of HBO2 on CCI in patients after cardiac arrest, even months to years after the acute event. Despite advanced cardiac
life support (ACLS), the mortality rate from sudden death after cardiac arrest is 85–95% (Nichol et al., 2008). Moreover, 33–50% of ACLS
survivors develop significant neurological dysfunction with variable extent, and these percentages rise to nearly 100% in the rare survivors
of non-witnessed arrests (Allen & Buckberg, 2012). The neuropathology of anoxic brain injury (ABI) includes neural toxicity, intracellular
calcium accumulation, oxygen free radicals, neurotransmitters and excitatory amino acid release, reperfusion injury and endothelial injury
(Guo, Yu, & Ma, 2011). The hippocampus, basal ganglia (especially the globus pallidum, thalamus) and deep central white matter regions are
the first to suffer damage due to their high metabolic requirements (Hopkins & Bigler, 2012). As the duration of anoxia increases, global
nonspecific damage in other parts of the brain develops. Accordingly, the clinical presentation includes impairments in visual perception,
expression, cognition and motor coordination (Fitzgerald, Aditya, Prior, McNeill, & Pentland, 2010; Hopkins & Bigler, 2012). Cognitive
impairment is common and may occur in 42–50% of the survivors (Moulaert, Verbunt, van Heugten, & Wade, 2009; van Alem, de Vos, Schmand, &
Koster, 2004). Memory, attention and executive function impairments are the most common (van Alem et al., 2004). Unfortunately, to date,
there is no effective therapy that can induce neuroplasticity with significant cognitive improvement in these survivors. While
neurorehabilitation starting in the first 3 months may result in modest improvement (Fertl, Vass, Sterz, Gabriel, & Auff, 2000), significant
cognitive improvement later than 3 months is considered to be very rare (Lim, Verfaellie, Schnyer, Lafleche, & Alexander, 2014). In general,
in comparison to the recovery from traumatic brain injury (TBI), ABI patients are left with more severe cognitive impairments and worse
functional debilitation (Shah, Al-Adawi, Dorvlo, &Burke, 2004). The neuroplasticity effects of hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBO2) on the
chronic damaged neuronal tissue have recently been evaluated in patients with chronic neurological deficiencies due to stroke or TBI
(Boussi-Gross et al., 2013, 2014; Efrati et al., 2013). HBO2 includes the inhalation of 100% oxygen at pressures exceeding 1 atmosphere
absolute (ATA) in order to enhance the amount of oxygen dissolved in the body tissues. As explained in detail by Efrati and Ben-Jacob
(2014), the diverse and powerful innate repair mechanisms activated by HBO2 are associated both with the elevated level of dissolved oxygen
and with the elevated pressure. The beneficial physiological effects of HBO2 on the injured brain and cognitive function have been
demonstrated in several animal models (Boussi-Gross et al., 2014; Palzur et al., 2004; Palzur, Zaaroor, Vlodavsky, Milman, & Soustiel,
2008). There is previous evidence for cognitive improvements after HBO2 in various neurological conditions (Barrett et al., 1998; Boussi-
Gross et al., 2013, 2014; Jacobs, Winter, Alvis, & Small, 1969; Mukherjee et al., 2014; Rossignol, Rossignol, James, Melnyk, & Mumper, 2007;
Tapeantong & Poungvarin, 2009); however, the neuroplasticity effects of HBO2 on patients suffering from ABI have not yet been investigated.
The purpose of the current study was to present the first series of cases of ABI patients suffering fromchronic cognitive impairments after
cardiac arrest treated by HBO2. Retrospective analysis of patients with CCI caused by cardiac arrest, treated at the institute of Hyperbaric
Medicine, Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Israel, between January 2008 and December 2014. The study was approved by the institutional review
board of the hospital. Inclusion criteria: patients who have completed two cognitive evaluations and assessments of SPECT brain imaging,
before and after HBO2. All patients applied for HBO2 on their own interest and funded the sessions. Imaging and functional tests were funded
by Assaf Harofe Hyperbaric institute. This were not informed on a research trial before or after their sessions. Patients were treated in a
multiplace hypberbaric chamber (HAUX-Life-Support GmbH.) for 60 daily sessions, 5 days per week. Each session consisted of 60 minutes
exposure to 100% oxygen at 1.5 ATA with 5 minutes air breaks every 30 minute. Acceptable compression and decompression rates of0.8 meter per
minute were used. Oxygen was supplied by tight masks. Patients’ cognitive functions were assessed by NeuroTrax computerized cognitive tests
(NeuroTrax Corp., TX) (Dwolatzky et al., 2003). NeuroTrax tests evaluate various aspects of brain functions and include: Verbal Memory
(immediate and delayed recognition), Non-Verbal Memory (immediate and delayed recognition), Go-No-Go Response Inhibition, Problem Solving,
Stroop Interference, Finger Tapping, Catch Game, Staged Information Processing Speed (single digit, two-digit and three-digit arithmetic),
Verbal Function and Visual Spatial Processing. Cognitive index scores were computed from normalized outcome parameters for these tests for
memory, executive function, attention, information processing speed, visual spatial, verbal function and motor skills domains (Achiron
et al., 2013; Thaler et al., 2012; Zur, Naftaliev, & Kesler, 2014). A global cognitive score was computed as the average of all index scores
for eachindividual. After administration, NeuroTrax data were uploaded to the NeuroTrax central server, and outcome parameters were
automatically calculated using software blind to diagnosis or testing site. To account for the well known effects of age and education on
cognitive performance, each outcome parameter was normalized and fit to an IQ-like scale (mean = 100, S.D. = 15) according to the patient’s
age and education. The normative data used by NeuroTrax consists of test data from cognitively healthy individuals in controlled research
studies at more than 10 sites (Doniger, 2014). Notably, the patients were given two different test versions of the NeuroTrax test battery
before and after HBO2, to allow repeated administrations with minimal learning effect. Test-retest reliability for those versions was
evaluated and found high, with no significant learning effect (Schweiger, 2003; Melton, 2005). The Activities of Daily Living (ADL) were
evaluated by a questionnaire covering the following functions: bathing, dressing, grooming, oral care, toileting, walking, climbing stairs,
eating, shopping, cooking, managing medications, using phone, housework, doing laundry, driving and managing finances (Katz, 1983). For each
function, the patient made a dependency rating ranging from independent, needs help, dependent or does not do at all, with a total score
ranging from 0 (worst) to 51 (best). Quality of Life (QOL) was evaluated by the EQ-5D questionnaire (Rabin & de Charro, 2001). EQ-5D
essentially consists of 2 pages: the EQ-5D descriptive system and the EQ visual analogue scale (EQ-VAS). The EQ-5D descriptive system covers
mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression [range: 5 (best) – 15 (worst)]. The EQ-VAS records the
respondent’s self-rated health on a vertical, visual analogue scale [range: 0 (worst) −100 (best)]. Brain activity was assessed using single
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) 1-2 weeks prior to and after the HBO2 period. The imaging was conducted using 925–1,110 MBq
(25–30 mCi) of technetium-99m-methyl-cysteinate-dimmer (Tc-99m-ECD) at 40–60 min post injection using a dual detector gamma camera (ECAM or
Symbia T, Siemens Medical Systems) equipped with high resolution collimators. Data were acquired in 3-degree steps and reconstructed
iteratively with Chang method (μ= 0.12/cm) attenuation correction (Jaszczak, Chang, Stein, & Moore, 1979). Both SPECT studies were
normalized to the median brain activity in the entire brain and were then reoriented into Talairach space using NeuroGam (Segami
Corporation) to identify Brodmann cortical areas and in order to compute the mean perfusion in each Brodmann area (BA). In addition, volume
rendered brain perfusion images were reconstructed and normalized to entire brain median activity. All SPECT analyses were done by study
team members who were blinded to the laboratory and clinical data. SPECT scans were performed late morning to midday. On the day of the
SPECT scan, patients were treated with only their chronic medications and were instructed not to smoke. Changes in perfusion in all Brodmann
areas for each subject were determined by calculating the percentage of the difference of the normalized activity value between post-
treatment and pre-treatment divided by the pre-treatment value. Continuous data were expressed as means ± standard errors. Relative changes
were calculated by subtracting the pre-treatment score from the post-treatment score, and dividing by the pre-treatment score. Normal
distribution for all continuous variables was tested using Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. The cognitive index scores and ADL mean differences
before and after HBO2 were analyzed using two tailed paired t-test. EQ-VAS mean difference before and after HBO2 was analyzed using Wilcoxon
signed ranks test. Alpha level was set to 0.05. The calculated sample size for 25% change in means was 10 patients. Data were statistically
analyzed using SPSS software (version 22.0). Of 28 patients suffering from ABI treated at the institute of Hyperbaric Medicine, Assaf
Harofeh Medical Center, Israel between January 2008 and December 2014, eleven patients had two neuro-cognitive evaluations before and after
HBO2. Among these patients, average age was 45.6 ± 4.4 years (29–70), and 9 out of 11 patients (81%) were males. All patients had chronic
stable neuro-cognitive impairment, and they began HBO2 5 months to 7.5 years (mean 2.6 ± 0.6 years) after cardiac arrest. Baseline patients’
characteristics are summarizedin Table 1. High inter-patient variability was present in the baseline cognitive indices. The magnitude of the
change in a cognitive score has different implications for patients at low or high baseline levels. Hence, we inspect the effect of HBO2 on
the relative changes, i.e. the change relative to the baseline value. Calculating mean ofrelative changes is more informative than
calculating the changes in mean values, especially in small groups with high patient to patient variability. One of the patients that had
prominent improvement from non-measureable scores, due to insufficient responses prior to treatment, to measureable scores in all cognitive
domains after treatment was not included in the means’ analysis. The effect of the hyperbaric oxygen treatment on the patients’ cognitive
functions, as assessed by the eight cognitive summary scores, is summarized in Table 2. As can be seen, HBO2 induced significant improvement
in the global cognitive scores with a mean relative change of 8% (p = 0.006). The most prominent improvement was in executive functions
indices, with 24% mean relative change (p = 0.011). Attention indices improved by mean relative change of 20% (p = 0.06). Memory indices by
mean relative change of 12% (p = 0.08) (Table 2, Fig. 1). Two of the patients could not complete the ADL questionnaire before HBO2. In the
nine patients who completed the pre and post HBO2 questionnaire, ADL score was significantly improved after HBO2 by an average of 5 points
(p = 0.002) (Table 3, Fig. 1). Nine patients completed pretreatment quality of life questionnaires. Compared to the pre-treatment score, EQ-
VAS and EQ-5D scores after HBO2 improved significantly (p = 0.027 and p = 0.015, respectively) (Table 3, Fig. 1). Five patients had brain
SPECT evaluations before and after HBO2. Six patients refused brain-SPECT imaging due to radiation exposure. The mean relative changes of
all patients revealed significant improvement (higher than 10%) in brain activity (reflected by perfusion) following HBO2 in the cingulate
gyrus (BA 31,32,23,24), inferior frontal gyrus (BA 47,44,45), perirhinal cortex (BA 36), primary visual cortex (BA 17) and parietal lobe (BA
7)(Figs. 2 and 3). Baseline cognitive evaluation showed a very low memory index score and low executive function, verbal function,
information processing speed, attention, and motor skills index scores. After 60 HBO2 sessions, the patient had improvements in verbal
function, executive function and attention from scores of 71, 73 and 68 to 106, 90 and 81, respectively. Improvement was also seen in memory
from 25 to 43, yet the score was still low. Clinically, with regards to his ADL after HBO2, the patient was able to participate in
housework, managing finances and shopping. Brain SPECT evaluation showed the that the largest post HBO2 increase in brain activity was in
the perirhinal cortex (BA 36) with over 50% increase, in the primary visual cortex (BA 17,18) with over 30% increase and in the cingulate
gyrus (BA 23, 31) with over 20% increase (Fig. 4). Cognitive evaluation at baseline showed low memory, visual spatial and executive function
scores in addition to low attention and motor scores. After 60 HBO2 sessions, the patient had improvement in memory, visual spatial and
executive function from scores of 58, 70 and 74 to 68, 76 and 79, respectively. Clinically, he had complete resolution of dysphasia.
Improvements were also noticed in ADL abilities such as ability to do laundry and manage finances. Additionally, he was able to return to
his previous work. Brain SPECT evaluation showed the largest post HBO2 increase in the parietal lobes (BA 5,7), temporal lobe with over 25%
increase, in the inferior orbital gyrus (BA 45,47), cingulate gyrus (BA 23,24), in Wernike’s area (BA 39) and in the primary visual cortex
(BA 17,18) with over 15% increase (Fig. 5). See Appendix for three additional case reports. The treatment was well tolerated and all
patients completed the treatment protocol. No significant adverse reactions were recorded in any of the patients. The neurotherapeutic
effects of HBO2 in patients suffering from CCI caused by cardiac arrest mediated anoxic brain injury, were evaluated by both clinical and
brain imaging measures. Even though the acute injury was 5 months to 7.5 years (mean 31.3 ± 7.7 months) prior to treatment, HBO2 was
associated with significant cognitive improvement in all patients. The clinical improvements were well documented by neurocognitive tests
and correlated with improved ability to perform the activities of daily living and quality of life. The most significant measurable
improvements were in executive function, attention and memory. Important validation and clues for future, larger scale studies were provided
by the SPECT brain imaging. We found the clinical improvement to be well correlated with increased activity in the relevant brain area. More
specifically, the brain areas that had the most significant increase in metabolic activation were in the perirhinal cortex (BA36), the pre-
frontal cortex (BA 8,9,10,11), inferior frontal gyrus (BA 45,47), the anterior cingulate gyrus (BA 23,24) and the parietal lobes (BA 5,7). A
good correlation was found between the improved neurocognitive functions and the brain areas corresponding to these functions:-The
perirhinal cortex activation after HBO2 was most prominent in patients that had significant memory improvement. The perirhinal cortex has a
critical role in object recognition memory while interacting with the hippocampus (Brown & Aggleton, 2001). Because the memoryassessments in
the cognitive tests were indeed recognition tasks, this area might be expected to be involved.-The pre-frontal cortex (BA 10, 11) and, more
specifically, the inferior frontal gyrus (BA 45, 47) activation after HBO2 were prominent in all patients with significant executive
function improvements. The right frontal gyrus is known to mediate a go/no go task (Aron, Robbins, & Poldrack, 2004), which was among the
executive function tests used in the present study. The prefrontal gyrus is presumed to act as a filtering system that enhances goal
directed activities and inhibits irrelevantactivations. This filtering mechanism enables executive control (Miller & Cohen, 2001).-The
anterior cingulate gyrus (BA 23, 24) activation after HBO2 was seen in the subjects with attention improvement. The anterior cingulate gyrus
is presumed to be involved in error detection, especially in a Stroop task (Bush, Luu, & Posner, 2000), which was used in the attention
tests. Lesions in this area can cause inattention to akinetic mutism (Bush et al., 2000).-The posterior parietal lobes are involved in
visual-spatial processing. Lesions in the right parietal lobe are known to cause visual spatial construction deficits (Mishkin &
Ungerleider, 1982). Activations of these areas were seen in the patients with visual-spatial index improvement. The perirhinal cortex
activation after HBO2 was most prominent in patients that had significant memory improvement. The perirhinal cortex has a critical role in
object recognition memory while interacting with the hippocampus (Brown & Aggleton, 2001). Because the memoryassessments in the cognitive
tests were indeed recognition tasks, this area might be expected to be involved. The pre-frontal cortex (BA 10, 11) and, more specifically,
the inferior frontal gyrus (BA 45, 47) activation after HBO2 were prominent in all patients with significant executive function
improvements. The right frontal gyrus is known to mediate a go/no go task (Aron, Robbins, & Poldrack, 2004), which was among the executive
function tests used in the present study. The prefrontal gyrus is presumed to act as a filtering system that enhances goal directed
activities and inhibits irrelevantactivations. This filtering mechanism enables executive control (Miller & Cohen, 2001). The anterior
cingulate gyrus (BA 23, 24) activation after HBO2 was seen in the subjects with attention improvement. The anterior cingulate gyrus is
presumed to be involved in error detection, especially in a Stroop task (Bush, Luu, & Posner, 2000), which was used in the attention tests.
Lesions in this area can cause inattention to akinetic mutism (Bush et al., 2000). The posterior parietal lobes are involved in visual-
spatial processing. Lesions in the right parietal lobe are known to cause visual spatial construction deficits (Mishkin & Ungerleider,
1982). Activations of these areas were seen in the patients with visual-spatial index improvement. The changes revealed by inspection of the
pre and post SPECT images indicate that HBO2 can induce reactivation of neuronal activity in stunned areas in agreement with earlier studies
(Barrett, 1998; Churchill et al., 2013; Jacobs et al., 1969). This implies that increasing the plasma dissolved oxygen with hyperbaric
oxygenation is a potent mean of delivering sufficient oxygen to the brain for repair processes and induction of neuroplasticity. In the past
30 years, there have been several studies on HBO2 effects in the delayed phase (>1 month) of anoxic brain injury caused by different
triggers and in varying ages (Collet et al., 2001; Jain, 2009; Montgomery et al., 1999; van Bever Donker, 1999, 2001). Most studies were
focused on children with cerebral palsy (Hardy et al., 2002). Neubauer et al reported on 8 adults with non-cardiac related anoxic
enceophalopathy who showed clinical improvement after more than 100 sessions of HBO2 using different hyperbaric protocols (Neubauer & James,
1998). Golden et al. showed improved cognitive functions in 21 adults with chronic brain injury (Golden, Golden, & Neubauer, 2006); however,
the causes and extent of the injuries were not reported. As in the current study, the Neubauer and Golden studies showed good correlations
with brain activity as evaluated by brain SPECT. In Churchill et al. prospective study, 13 patients with anoxic brain injury had subjective
cognitive improvement after HBO2however no change was observed in standardizedtesting (Churchill et al., 2013). The NeuroTrax cognitive
tests, used for the cognitive evaluation, are validated for test-retest evaluations. Data from healthy young adults retested withNeuroTrax
test battery on the same day, (Doniger, Simon, & Zivotofsky, 2006) demonstrated small mean relative changes (<5%), and intra class
correlations provided support for good reliability. Middle age adults retested with an alternate form of the same battery, (A. Schweiger,
2003) showed stable cognitive scores with small mean relative changes (<5%) except in verbal function (16%) and information processing speed
(8%). In the current study, after HBO2, the patients showed improvement in global cognitive function memory and executive function indices
of 14–42% , with retesting more than 3 months after the baseline evaluation. Our findings are in agreement with the previous studies
evaluating the effects of HBO2 in the chronic phase of ABI (Hardy et al., 2002; Golden et al., 2006). To our knowledge, this is the first
case series of HBO2 application in the chronic phase of brain anoxia focused on patients after cardiac arrest. The use of objective
cognitive tests in tandem with objective metabolic brain imaging in the current study, strengthens the conclusion that HBO2 can induce
neuroplasticity even at the late chronic stage of ABI. This study has several limitations. The major one relates to the retrospective
methodology and the relatively small number of patients. Still, the findings presented here are in agreement with and reinforce similar
findings from previous prospective controlled trials in which the neuroplasticity effects of HBO2 were demonstrated in chronic stages of
other brain related injuries (Boussi-Gross et al., 2013). These studies provided convincing evidence that HBO2 can induce neuroplasticity at
chronic stages in areas with metabolic dysfunction. Moreover, the natural history of anoxic brain injury implies that maximal recovery is
expected during the first 3 months, and no further significant improvement is expected after 3 months (Lim et al., 2014). Accordingly, any
significant improvement after 5 months may be attributed to the intervention used. Although significant clinical improvement at a relatively
late chronic stage and high correlation with the improved metabolic activity support the validity of the findings, larger randomized
prospective controlled trials are needed. Another important limitation relates to the HBO2 protocol. Although significant neurotherapeutic
effects were achieved with 60 sessions of 1.5 ATA for 60 minutes, the exact protocol needed to induce maximal neuroplasticity with minimal
side effects remains unknown. There is cumulative data that even smaller increase in pressure might be as effective (Efrati & Ben-Jacob,
2014). As stated above, further randomized controlledtrials with large patient cohorts are needed to betterunderstand who the best
candidates are and what the optimal HBO2 protocol is for patients suffering from ABI. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy may improve cognitive
functions even during the late chronic phase after ABI resulting from cardiac arrest. Due to the growing numbers of cardiac arrest
survivors, the application of HBO2 in this population should be considered. Further prospective randomized clinical studies should be
carried out in order to evaluate the patients who can benefit the most from the treatment and the optimal HBO2 protocol (dose and duration)
for thispopulation. The authors have no financial or personal relationships to disclose regarding this research and data. Case 3: 70 years
old male, 5 years post cardiac arrest, suffering from motor dysphasia, 4 limbs spasticity with no ability to walk, swallowing difficulties
and incontinence. At baseline, the patient could not complete the cognitive evaluation due to very low communication and cognitive skills.
After 60 HBO2 sessions, clinically, he had considerable improvement in speech, controlled continence, swallowing and walking capabilities.
In addition, in the neuro-cognitive test he had significant improvement in memory, attention, verbal and visual spatial indices from
unmeasurables to scores of 98, 70, 102, 89 and 89.7 respectively. In brain SPECT evaluation, the greatest improvement in brain perfusion
(higher than 20%) following HBO2 was seen in the frontal lobes – pre frontal gyrus (BA 10) orbito-frontal gyrus (BA 11) inferior frontal
gyrus (BA 45,47), pre motor cortex (BA 6). Improvement (higher than 10%) was also seen in the parietal lobes (BA 7), temporal lobes (BA
20,38) and cingulate gyrus (BA 24,32) (Fig. 6). Case 4: 57 years old male, 2.5 years post ventricular fibrillation, suffered from dysarthria
and significant cognitive dysfunction. Cognitive evaluation showed low memory, verbal and visual spatial, executive function, information
processing speed and attention index scores. Motor skills were high at baseline. After 60 HBO2 daily sessions, cognitive evaluation revealed
improvement to in executive function, verbal, visual spatial and memory indices from scores of 98, 88, 84, 69 to 111, 104, 104, 79
respectively. Clinically, in addition to cognitive improvement, the patient had considerable improvement in speech and daily function – he
returned to work and drive by himself. SPECT evaluation demonstrated the greatest improvement in brain perfusion after HBO2 in the inferior
frontal gyrus (BA 45,47), posterior cingulate gyrus (BA 31,32) with over 20% change. Over 10% changes in prefrontal gyrus (BA 8,9), Broca’s
and Wernike’s areas (BA 22,39,44) (Fig. 7). Case 5: 30 years old male, 5 months post ventricular fibrillation suffered from ataxia and
significant cognitive decline. Cognitive evaluation at baseline showed very low memory, attention and executive function scores, and low
information processing speed, motor skills, visual spatial and verbal scores. After 60 HBO2 sessions, cognitive evaluation showed
improvement in executive function and attention from scores of 44, 38 to 62 and 59 respectively. SPECT evaluation revealed the greatest
improvement in brain perfusion after HBO2 in the perirhinal cortex (BA 36) with over 20% change, inferior frontal gyrus (BA 47), cingulate
gyrus (BA 24), primary visual gyrus (BA 17), prefrontal gyrus (BA 10), and inferior temporal gyrus (BA 20) with over 15% change(Fig. 8). The
authors would like to thank Dr. Glen Doniger (Neurotrax Corp.) for his contribution. NeuroTrax Corp. did not have a role in the design and
conduct of the study, collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data, preparation or approval of the manuscript, or
decision to submit the manuscript for publication. The study was funded by the Assaf HaRofeh Medical Center research fund. Improvements in
cognitive functions ADL and quality of life (EQ-5D, EQ-VAS). A. Mean changes of the corresponding cognitive indices at baseline and after
HBO2. Statistical significance (p < 0.05) is marked by *. Note lower EQ-5D score represents higher quality of life. Bars represent means +
standard errors. B. The mean percentage of the relative changes (Post-Pre)/Pre. The mean CBF relative change after hyperbaric oxygen therapy
calculated per Brodmann area. The Brodmann areas that were most improved after HBO2; perirhinal cortex (BA36) in red, the pre-frontal cortex
(BA 8,9,10,11) in blue, inferior frontal gyrus (BA 45,47) in yellow, the anterior cingulate gyrus (BA 23,24) in green, primary visual cortex
(BA 17) in purple and the parietal lobes (BA 5,7) in orange. Case 1 SPECT calculated change after HBO2 compared to baseline. In the first
two rows colors represent maximal functional brain activity relative to brain median activity, where in the bottom row colors represent the
regional change in functional brain activity. White and red areas show the highest changes in CBF. Case 2 SPECT calculated change after HBO2
compared to baseline. In the first two rows colors represent maximal functional brain activity relative to brain median activity, where in
the bottom row colors represent the regional change in functional brain activity. White and red areas show the highest changes in CBF. Case
3 SPECT calculated change after HBO2 compared to baseline. White and red areas show the highest changes in CBF. In the first two rows color
represent metabolic activity, where in third row colors represent the subtraction of the two previous rows, i.e. the change in metabolic
activity. Memory, attention, verbal and visual spatial indices improved from non measureable scores to 98, 70, 102, 89 and 89.7
respectively. Case 4 SPECT calculated change after HBO2 compared to baseline. In the first two rows color represent maximal functional
activity relative to brain median activity, where in bottom row colors represent the change in regional brain activity. White and red areas
show the highest changes in CBF. Executive function, verbal, visual spatial and memory indices improved from scores of 98, 88, 84, 69 to
111, 104, 104, 79 respectively. Case 5 SPECT calculated change after HBO2 compared to baseline. In the first two rows color represent
maximal brain activity relative to brain median activity, where in the bottom row colors represent the change in regional brain function
i.e. the change in metabolic activity. A global improvement of brain activity is demonstrated more accentuated in both occipital cortices.
White and red areas show the highest changes in CBF. Executive function and attention indices improved from 44 and 38 to 62 and 59,
respectively. Basic characteristics of patients at baseline Note the average time of 31 months from cardiac arrest. Data are expressed as
means ± standard errors. Cognitive indices at baseline, after Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy (HBO2). Mean relative change is calculated by mean
change divided by the pre HBO2 mean score. Data are expressed as means ± standard errors One of the patients that had prominent improvement
from non-measureable scores due to insufficient responses prior to treatment to measurable scores in all cognitive domains after treatment
was not included in this analysis. *significant (p < 0.05) by two-tailed paired t-test. Activity of Daily Living (ADL) and quality of life
(EQ-5D and EQ-VAS) scores before and after Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy. Mean relative change is calculated by mean change divided by the pre
HBO2 mean score. Data are expressed as means ± standard errors ADL difference before and after HBO2 was analyzed using two-tailed paired
t-test. EQ-VAS and EQ-5D were analyzed using Wilcoxon signed ranks test. *marks statistical significance.
