Many in vivo studies have shown a difference in pre- and/or postsynaptic imaging between Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy;
however, time course differences in pre- and postsynaptic imaging between Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy have not been
rigorously investigated. We report serial positron emission tomography images of both dopamine transporters and dopamine D2 receptors,
obtained from a Japanese patient with Parkinson’s disease who underwent positron emission tomography scanning at ages 71, 72, 74, and
75 years, and another Japanese patient with multiple system atrophy who underwent positron emission tomography scanning at ages 65, 66, and
67 years. Volumes-of-interest were placed on the striatal subregions. The percentage decreases between the first and last images showed that
dopamine transporter availability decreased with disease progression in both patients, but that dopamine D2 receptor availability decreased
only in the patient with multiple system atrophy. A partial correlation analysis between dopamine transporter and dopamine D2 receptor
availability, controlling for the effects of striatal subregional differences, revealed a positive correlation in the patient with multiple
system atrophy (r = 0.893, P = 0.0002), but no significant correlation in the patient with Parkinson’s disease (r = −0.036, P = 0.89). The
time course of pre- and postsynaptic imaging can be considerably different between Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy, and may
be useful in improving the accuracy of discrimination between Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy. Parkinson’s disease (PD) and
multiple system atrophy (MSA) are neurodegenerative disorders affecting the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system. Imaging of presynaptic
neurons using positron emission tomography (PET) or single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) with a radioligand for dopamine
transporters (DATs) cannot distinguish between PD and MSA, especially on the individual level, because both diseases cause neuronal
degeneration in the substantia nigra (SN) [1, 2]. However, PET or SPECT imaging of postsynaptic neurons with a radioligand for dopamine D2
receptors (D2Rs) can improve the accuracy of discrimination between PD and MSA, as D2R-expressing striatal neurons tend to degenerate in MSA
but not in PD [3, 4]. Many in vivo studies have shown a difference in pre- and/or postsynaptic imaging between PD and MSA ; however,
differences in the time course of these measures between PD and MSA have not been rigorously investigated. In order to address this deficit,
we examined pre- and postsynaptic imaging time courses in a patient with PD and another with MSA, focusing on the differential diagnosis
between PD and MSA. To quantify availability of DATs and D2Rs, we used carbon-11-labeled 2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-fluorophenyl)-tropane
(11C-CFT) and carbon-11-labeled raclopride (11C-raclopride), respectively. Participants comprised two Japanese female patients, one each
with PD and MSA, who were recruited from cross-sectional studies of PD and PD-related disorders at the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
Gerontology . The PET data used in this study were collected for research purposes. All procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of
the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology. The two patients provided written informed consent for publication. Six months after
developing a right leg tremor, she was diagnosed with PD at the age of 71, and underwent 11C-CFT and 11C-raclopride PET scanning at ages 71,
72, 74, and 75 years. On initial examination at age 71, she had resting tremor and mild rigidity of her right arm and leg. Levodopa was
administered and effective, but without levodopa a mild postural instability developed at age 74. Her Hoehn and Yahr stage at ages 71 and 75
were 1 and 3, respectively. A 65-year-old woman was referred to the neurology department of our hospital after she had developed a
progressive gait disturbance over the previous 2 years. On initial examination, she had parkinsonian symptoms (postural instability,
bradykinesia, and mild cogwheel rigidity on the left side), cerebellar ataxia, pyramidal sign in both legs, and orthostatic hypotension
which was confirmed by a head-up tilt test. She was diagnosed with MSA, and underwent 11C-CFT and 11C-raclopride PET scanning at ages 65,
66, and 67 years. Levodopa was ineffective. Ages for aid-requiring walking, wheelchair dependence, and a bedridden state were 65, 66, and
67 years, respectively. PET scanning was performed on a SET-2400 W scanner (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) in three-dimensional mode at the
Institute. Static emission data were acquired for 75–90 min and 40–55 min after an intravenous bolus infusion of 11C-CFT and 11C-raclopride,
respectively. The injection doses for both radioligands were 300 MBq. Volumes-of-interest (VOIs) were placed on the striatal subregions: the
ventral striatum (VST), pre-commissural dorsal caudate (pre-DCA), post-commissural caudate (post-CA), pre-commissural dorsal putamen (pre-
DPU) and post-commissural putamen (post-PU) . A visual cortex VOI was also created and used as a reference region [11, 12]. To estimate DAT
and D2R availability in each VOI, the uptake ratio index (URI) of 11C-CFT and 11C-raclopride was calculated by the following formula:
URI = [(activity in the target region) − (activity in the visual cortex)]/[(activity in the visual cortex)] . The normal range for URI is
different among striatal subregions. In order to compare the magnitude of changes in DAT and D2R availability from the first to last PET
images across striatal subregions, the Z score for each was calculated in contrast with the mean and standard deviation (SD) values of
controls (with data belonging to the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology), as in the following formula: Z score = [(URI in the
patient) − (mean URI in controls)]/[(SD URI in controls)]. In order to compare the time course of pre- and postsynaptic imaging between the
patients with PD and MSA, we tested the relationship between DAT and D2R availability with a partial correlation approach, controlling for
the effects of striatal subregional differences, using SPSS Statistics version 22 (IBM, Armonk, NY). Statistical significance was set at
P < 0.05. The Z score and percentage decreases of DAT and D2R availability from the first to last PET images in each striatal subregion and
whole striatum are shown in Fig. 1 and Table 1, respectively. Table 1 shows that DAT availability decreased with disease progression in both
patients, and that D2R availability also decreased in the patient with MSA, but not the patient with PD. The partial correlation analysis
showed a positive correlation between DAT and D2R availability for the patient with MSA (partial correlation coefficient: r = 0.893,
P = 0.0002), but there was no any significant correlation for the patient with PD (r = −0.036, P = 0.89).Fig. 1Comparison of the time course
of dopamine transporter and dopamine D2 receptor availability between the patient with Parkinson’s disease and the patient with multiple
system atrophy. Data in all striatal subregions from the first to last images were used. The horizontal and vertical axes represent the Z
scores of dopamine transporter and dopamine D2 receptor availability, respectively. Black, blue, red, yellow, and green circles represent
data from the ventral striatum, pre-commissural dorsal caudate, post-commissural caudate, pre-commissural dorsal putamen, and post-
commissural putamen, respectively. Open and closed circles represent the patient with Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy,
respectively. The partial correlation, controlling for the effects of regional differences, is significant in the patient with multiple
system atrophy (r = 0.893, P = 0.0002), but not in the patient with Parkinson’s disease (r = −0.036, P = 0.89)Table 1Percentage decreases of
dopamine transporter and dopamine D2 receptor availability between the first and last positron emission tomography imagesVentral striatum
(%)Pre-commissural dorsal caudate (%)Pre-commissural dorsal putamen (%)Post-commissural caudate (%)Post-commissural putamen (%)Whole
striatum (%)Parkinson’s disease Dopamine transporter17.418.021.231.728.121.3 Dopamine D2 receptor−14.61.5−9.7−5.4−22.6−13.3Multiple system
atrophy Dopamine transporter44.670.534.166.843.750.7 Dopamine D2 receptor55.667.746.441.348.753.3Percentage decreases were calculated by the
following formula: 100 × [(uptake ratio index in the first image) − (uptake ratio index in the last image)]/(uptake ratio index in the first
image) Comparison of the time course of dopamine transporter and dopamine D2 receptor availability between the patient with Parkinson’s
disease and the patient with multiple system atrophy. Data in all striatal subregions from the first to last images were used. The
horizontal and vertical axes represent the Z scores of dopamine transporter and dopamine D2 receptor availability, respectively. Black,
blue, red, yellow, and green circles represent data from the ventral striatum, pre-commissural dorsal caudate, post-commissural caudate,
pre-commissural dorsal putamen, and post-commissural putamen, respectively. Open and closed circles represent the patient with Parkinson’s
disease and multiple system atrophy, respectively. The partial correlation, controlling for the effects of regional differences, is
significant in the patient with multiple system atrophy (r = 0.893, P = 0.0002), but not in the patient with Parkinson’s disease
(r = −0.036, P = 0.89) Percentage decreases of dopamine transporter and dopamine D2 receptor availability between the first and last
positron emission tomography images Percentage decreases were calculated by the following formula: 100 × [(uptake ratio index in the first
image) − (uptake ratio index in the last image)]/(uptake ratio index in the first image) The first and last DAT and D2R PET images are
displayed in Fig. 2. Consistent with Table 1, DAT availability tended to decrease in both patients. However, D2R availability tended to
decrease in the patient with MSA, but not the patient with PD.Fig. 2Dopamine transporter and dopamine D2 receptor images. The first and last
images of dopamine transporters and dopamine D2 receptors in the patient with Parkinson’s disease and the patient with multiple system
atrophy are displayed in axial sections. The rainbow scale represents the magnitude of uptake ratio index Dopamine transporter and dopamine
D2 receptor images. The first and last images of dopamine transporters and dopamine D2 receptors in the patient with Parkinson’s disease and
the patient with multiple system atrophy are displayed in axial sections. The rainbow scale represents the magnitude of uptake ratio index
Longitudinal changes in DAT and D2R imaging have been established in PD patents. The dorsal posterior part of the putamen, which is
anatomically equivalent to the post-PU in this study, is the initial region of DAT loss and is most severely affected throughout the illness
[2, 9, 10]. The number of DATs in each subregion of the striatum decreases along with neuronal loss in the SN and the disease progression,
presumably following an exponential curve [2, 10, 13]. On the other hand, according to in vitro studies showing that the number of striatal
D2Rs is constant even in the advanced stage of PD [3, 4], striatal D2R availability in an imaging study is also expected to be constant
throughout the illness. D2R images, however, may be complicated. In early PD, the expression of D2R may be upregulated as a compensatory
response to a decrease in endogenous dopamine levels [14, 15]. In longstanding PD, chronic dopaminergic therapy or structural adaptation of
the postsynaptic neurons to the progressive degeneration of the presynaptic dopaminergic system may downregulate D2R expression .
Additionally, the loss of endogenous dopamine can cause increased binding of 11C-raclopride (i.e., increased D2R availability) throughout
the illness . Our findings from an early PD patient were explainable based on those findings. To our knowledge, this is the first study to
investigate the time course of pre- and postsynaptic imaging in a patient with MSA, and that showed a positive correlation between the two
(Fig. 1). A pathological study with 35 MSA patients has reported that neurons in both the SN and striatum, especially the putamen, were
severely depleted in most cases, and that the degree of nigral and putaminal damage tended to be associated with disease duration . The
latter finding was supported by two neuroimaging studies (not longitudinal) showing a positive correlation between DAT and D2R availability
in MSA groups [6, 12]. Together, previous and our findings show that the functional impairment of both pre- and postsynaptic dopaminergic
systems in MSA should develop with disease progression due to neuronal degeneration in the SN and striatum. Differentiating MSA from PD is
often difficult in their early stages, and this sometimes remains difficult even in the late stages of these diseases. About 20 % of
patients still carrying a diagnosis of PD were pathologically diagnosed with another neurodegenerative disorder at the time of death, and
MSA was the most frequently misidentified pathology [18, 19]. Pre- and postsynaptic striatal imaging can help in differential diagnosis;
however, not all MSA patients exhibit a significant reduction of D2R availability , especially when neuronal loss in the striatum is mild.
DAT imaging can demonstrate differences between PD and MSA on the group level but not on an individual level . On the other hand, the
present study showed that along with decreasing DAT availability (i.e., disease progression), D2R availability also decreased in the patient
with MSA, but not in the patient with PD, and suggests that the time course of pre- and postsynaptic imaging can be considerably different
between these conditions. Thus, in cases where initial pre- and postsynaptic imaging cannot discriminate between PD and MSA, observation of
the individual time courses of pre- and postsynaptic imaging, at an interval of at least a few years, may improve the differential diagnosis
of PD and MSA. However, when pre- and postsynaptic imaging is used for clinical purposes, the subsequent PET or SPECT scans should be
reserved for unclear cases and their indication should be scrutinized to avoid cumulative exposure to radiation. One of the limitations of
the present study is that PD and MSA are heterogeneous disorders with multiple factors contributing to symptoms and disease progression [21,
22]. Thus, one cannot necessarily expect other patients with PD or MSA to follow the cases presented here. However, as typical cases of PD
and MSA, our cases may provide essential information for differentiating between PD and MSA. Parkinson’s disease multiple system atrophy
dopamine transporter dopamine D2 receptor positron emission tomography single photon emission computed tomography substantia nigra
carbon-11-labeled 2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-fluorophenyl)-tropane carbon-11-labeled raclopride volume-of-interest ventral striatum pre-
commissural dorsal caudate post-commissural caudate pre-commissural dorsal putamen post-commissural putamen uptake ratio index standard
deviation KIshibashi participated in the design and conceptualization of the study, performed the analysis and interpretation of the data,
and drafted the manuscript. HN and KIshii managed the patients, and participated in the design and conceptualization of the study. KIshiwata
drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Mr. Kunpei Hayashi and Ms. Hiroko Tsukinari
for their technical assistance. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Informed consent Written
informed consent was obtained from the two patients for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent from each patient is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
