Vena cava compression is a relatively rare initial manifestation of underlying malignancy. The superior vena cava syndrome, which is
characterized by facial plethora, jugular venous distension, and arm swelling, is a well-known entity associated with bronchogenic
carcinoma. Less common is the compression of the inferior vena cava. To the best of my knowledge, this is the first reported case of newly
diagnosed gastric adenocarcinoma presenting initially as the inferior vena cava syndrome. The unique aspect about this case is that it
highlights a rare presentation before diagnosis of gastric adenocarcinoma. A 56-year-old Malaysian woman with a past medical history of iron
deficiency anemia presented with lower extremity edema and progressive fatigue of 1 month’s duration. She had significant worsening of leg
swelling after standing for short periods of time. She also reported epigastric discomfort, which led to an additional workup, including
computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis. This revealed a 3cm×2.9cm mass in the stomach, extensive hepatic metastasis, and severe
inferior vena cava compression. The patient was examined further with esophagogastroduodenoscopy, and a biopsy showed gastric
adenocarcinoma. This report describes a case of a patient with inferior vena cava syndrome as a unique presentation of previously
undiagnosed stage IV gastric adenocarcinoma. Patients presenting with inferior vena cava syndrome should undergo prompt evaluation for
underlying malignancies that have a predilection for hepatic metastasis. This case is important because earlier recognition of this syndrome
can lead to earlier workup and thus detection of malignancy. Prompt initiation of treatment, including chemotherapy or vena cava stent
placement, can result in improved patient outcome. The clinical manifestations of malignancy vary tremendously and can include direct mass
effect of tumor and paraneoplastic effects. A paraneoplastic syndrome is frequently the first manifestation of malignancy. Common
paraneoplastic manifestations of gastric adenocarcinoma include acanthosis nigricans and Leser-Trélat sign [1, 2]. Other features that are
mostly unique to gastric cancer include Virchow’s node, Krukenberg tumor, and Sister Mary Joseph nodule, though these are not common at the
time of initial presentation [3, 4]. Direct mass effect is typically detected during clinical examination only after there is significant
imposition upon other anatomic structures, such as nerves or vessels. For example, symptoms such as facial plethora and arm swelling as a
result of the superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome in a patient with a history of smoking sometimes leads to the workup and eventual diagnosis
of lung cancer. An underlying cancer is the cause of more than 90% of cases of the SVC syndrome. Other cancers associated with SVC syndrome
include thymoma, mesothelioma, lymphoma, and germ cell tumors . However, the clinical presentation of these malignancies does not include
vena cava compression in most cases. There are very few reports of inferior vena cava (IVC) compression, in contrast to the SVC syndrome, as
a manifestation of underlying malignancy. Some tumors have been reported to have compressive effects on the IVC. A recent case report showed
that IVC compression was caused by a mesenteric desmoid tumor in a patient who presented with acute pulmonary embolism . Neuroblastoma in a
neonate who had lower extremity edema was shown to cause IVC compression . Two cases of paragangliomas have been reported to cause IVC
compression posteriorly . A 56-year-old Malaysian woman with a past medical history of anemia presented with lower extremity swelling, early
satiety, and abdominal discomfort of 1 month’s duration. She reported worsening of leg edema upon standing for short periods of time. She
denied chest pain or shortness of breath. She had emigrated from Malaysia approximately 10 years before presentation. She had been taking
oral iron supplementation and omeprazole. A colonoscopy had been performed 1 year before presentation to assess for gastrointestinal
bleeding, and the results were normal. Her Helicobacter pylori breath test result was positive, and she was started on triple therapy with
two antibiotics plus a proton pump inhibitor. An endoscopic examination was done, and the result was suggestive of a mass, though the
diagnosis was not definitive. Her family history was not significant. Her social history was significant for frequent consumption of fish in
Malaysia and was negative for alcohol, cigarette, or drug use. Upon her admission to Stanford University Hospital, she reported a 10-lb
weight gain. The weight gain was caused by edema, though she felt a sensation that she was becoming thinner. She reported that she was
unable to stand for more than 15 minutes owing to accumulation of fluid in her legs. She reported that her mobility was thus limited. Her
vital signs were stable, with a body temperature of 37°C, blood pressure of 134/78mmHg, pulse of 79 beats per minute, and respiratory rate
of 18 breaths per minute. Her O2 saturation was 100%. Her physical examination revealed a grade 3/6 systolic ejection murmur heard best at
the left lower sternal border. Her abdomen was non-tender to palpation, and her bowel sounds were normoactive. Examination of the
extremities revealed 2+ non-pitting edema extending to her thighs bilaterally. She had no palpable peri-umbilical or supraclavicular nodes.
She had no other palpable lymphadenopathy. Her skin examination was normal. Laboratory values showed hemoglobin of 8.5g/dl with mean
corpuscular volume of 71.2fl. Her reticulocyte count was 4.36%. An iron panel revealed ferritin of 32ng/ml, transferrin of 403μg/dl,
transferrin saturation of 3%, and iron level of 13μg/dl. Her platelet count was 519,000/μl, and her white blood cell count was normal. Her
metabolic panel was significant for sodium of 134mmol/L. Her liver function tests were significant for aspartate aminotransferase of 122U/L,
alkaline phosphatase of 478U/L, and albumin of 2.3g/dl. Her electrocardiogram showed T-wave inversions in leads V1–V4 and an S1Q3T3 pattern.
The differential diagnosis included pulmonary embolism and myocardial injury or ischemia. Her troponin level was negative. An ultrasound of
the lower extremities showed no deep vein thrombosis. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed severe intrahepatic
narrowing of the IVC due to mass effect (Fig. 1) and an ill-defined 3cm×2.9cm mass involving the antrum of the stomach (Fig. 2). The CT
scans were also notable for omental implants and nodular extension of the gastric tumor posteriorly into the lesser sac. She had a small
amount of ascites. The gastric mass was biopsied during endoscopy (initially at an outside hospital). The histologic sections of the gastric
antrum mass biopsy revealed an invasive, moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of intestinal type, with formation of glands and nests
(Fig. 3). The biopsy had a pancytokeratin-positive neoplasm. The patient was started on chemotherapy with capecitabine 1500mg by mouth twice
daily and oxaliplatin 130mg/m2. The interventional radiology team evaluated the patient for possible IVC stent placement at a later time
with the goal of alleviating venous obstruction. IVC stent placement was deferred while the patient was an inpatient because this procedure
was typically reserved as palliative treatment for patients in whom chemotherapy has limited utility or for patients who have a poor
response to chemotherapy.Fig. 1Compression of the inferior vena cava by foci of hepatic metastases. Computed tomographic scan of the abdomen
and pelvis with intravenous contrast shows that the inferior vena cava (green arrows) becomes progressively more compressed by the tumor
superiorly to inferiorly. a Patent inferior vena cava at the level of the pancreas. d Near-complete compression of the inferior vena cava at
a level of the superior portion of the kidneys. a-d Superiorly to inferiorlyFig. 2Adenocarcinoma involving the antrum of the stomach.
Computed tomographic scan of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast shows an ill-defined 3cm×2.9cm necrotic mass. Scan also
reveals omental implants and nodular extension of the gastric tumor posteriorly into the lesser sacFig. 3Histologic specimens from gastric
antral mass biopsy. The biopsy revealed invasive, moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of intestinal type, with formation of glands and
nests. Shown are images at various magnifications: ×10 (a), ×20 (b), and ×40 (c) Compression of the inferior vena cava by foci of hepatic
metastases. Computed tomographic scan of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast shows that the inferior vena cava (green arrows)
becomes progressively more compressed by the tumor superiorly to inferiorly. a Patent inferior vena cava at the level of the pancreas. d
Near-complete compression of the inferior vena cava at a level of the superior portion of the kidneys. a-d Superiorly to inferiorly
Adenocarcinoma involving the antrum of the stomach. Computed tomographic scan of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast shows an
ill-defined 3cm×2.9cm necrotic mass. Scan also reveals omental implants and nodular extension of the gastric tumor posteriorly into the
lesser sac Histologic specimens from gastric antral mass biopsy. The biopsy revealed invasive, moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of
intestinal type, with formation of glands and nests. Shown are images at various magnifications: ×10 (a), ×20 (b), and ×40 (c) She was
followed in the outpatient oncology clinic and was scheduled for a total of six cycles of capecitabine with oxaliplatin. Her course was
complicated by gastrointestinal bleeding from the gastric tumor after the fourth cycle of chemotherapy (Fig. 4). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
revealed a tumor that was unamenable to endoscopic therapy. She then recovered from gastrointestinal bleeding. Her HER2 test result was
positive before the continuation of additional cycles of capecitabine and oxaliplatin, and she was thus started on trastuzumab 8mg/kg and
paclitaxel 175mg/m2. She reported improvement in her appetite and energy level at her follow-up visits, though she continued to have
abdominal bloating. At the time this writing, she was in cycle 5 of paclitaxel and trastuzumab.Fig. 4Endoscopic images of gastric tumor
Endoscopic images of gastric tumor The initial presentation of gastric adenocarcinoma typically involves abdominal symptoms and hematologic
abnormalities, including anemia due to gastrointestinal blood loss. Paraneoplastic signs are sometimes the initial manifestations. One case
report of a man with a new diagnosis of gastric adenocarcinoma revealed that the first sign was multiple seborrheic keratoses on the
shoulders . It is worthwhile to note and appreciate the less common presentations of internal malignancy, as these may comprise the first
and only indication of early disease. Early diagnosis, especially in cases of malignancy, can divert poor clinical outcomes. Vena cava
compression as a result of malignancy can be a challenge to diagnose and manage. The SVC syndrome is a well-documented feature of lung
cancer, but there exist few case reports of patients presenting with symptoms related to mass effect on the IVC. IVC compression is
interestingly not limited to malignancies; other causes include thrombus and intrinsic caval disease, which must be considered when
performing a workup for cancer . The diagnosis of the IVC syndrome is based largely on clinical features, including lower extremity edema,
in the setting of radiographic findings demonstrating vena cava compression. Tachycardia can result from decreased preload due to venous
pooling in the lower extremities. Imaging modalities in the past have included radionuclide venography. Current methods include CT of the
abdomen, which can reveal intracaval thrombi, and magnetic resonance imaging with angiography [9, 10]. The treatment of vena cava
compression syndromes commonly involves stenting or radiation. Expandable metallic stents have been used to treat IVC compression caused by
hepatic tumors . Tumors that compress the SVC, such as lung cancer, are generally radiosensitive . In contrast, treatment of the IVC
syndrome has not been clearly described, but presumably it involves treating the underlying cause of compression. This may include a
combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation. Interventional approaches include placement of an intravascular stent or surgical
bypass grafting . The patient was noted to have significant improvement in her lower extremity edema after initiation of capecitabine and
oxaliplatin, likely resulting in reduction in the size of the metastatic lesions. To the best of my knowledge, this is the first reported
case of a patient presenting with lower extremity edema and the IVC syndrome as a manifestation of underlying stage IV gastric
adenocarcinoma. There are some well-known paraneoplastic manifestations of gastric adenocarcinomas, but IVC compression has not been
previously described. This case report emphasizes that workup of underlying malignancy, especially primary cancers with predilection for
liver metastasis, should be done in patients with signs and symptoms of IVC compression. This is a significant case because prompt detection
of malignancy can lead to improved outcomes. This case highlights the important components of secondary prevention in gastrointestinal
oncology—namely, prevention of complications or exacerbation of disease once the disease is diagnosed. In this case, an improvement in
outcomes was achieved by having a low threshold for initiating a workup for malignancy in a patient who presented with the IVC syndrome.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. computed tomography inferior vena cava superior vena cava
Competing interests The author declares that there are no competing interests regarding the publication of this report. Dr. George Fisher of
Stanford University contributed to the conception of this case report.
