Therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) is one possible treatment for patients resistant to conventional antithyroid drugs or requiring urgent
attention for thyrotoxicosis. We report a 35-yr-old man with thyrotoxicosis, ultimately attributed to Graves' disease in whom antithyroid
drug used initially was soon discontinued, due to abnormal liver function, and replaced by Lugol's solution. Three weeks later, an escape
phenomenon (to Lugol's solution) was apparent, so we performed TPE to control the thyrotoxicosis. Two courses of TPE by a centrifugal type
machine resulted in diminished levels of thyroid hormone levels, which then rebounded after another two courses of membrane filtration type
TPE. However, the patient could be treated with radioactive iodine therapy without any complications at present. In conventional management
of Grave disease (GD), there are three major options: antithyroid drugs, radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, and thyroidectomy (1). According
to the guidelines of the American Thyroid Association and the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, any one of these modalities
is acceptable, as dictated by physician's experience and/or patient preference; although a recent systematic review, based on specific
outcomes, suggests that surgery may be the most effective (12). In Asia and Europe, antithyroid drugs are preferred as first-line treatment
of GD. However, serious related adverse effects (ie, agranulocytosis or hepatotoxicity) may ensue, in which case these drugs should be
withdrawn, and RAI therapy or surgery should be considered (12). Since thyroid function should be at or near normal to avoid potential
transient aggravation of thy-rotoxicosis during or after RAI or surgery (1), adjunctive management of thyrotoxicosis is often required.
Iodine solution is the most widely used adjunct in this context, and it is usually quite effective in stabilizing thyroid function (1).
Still, its effects are often transient and an escape phenomenon may develop with long-term use. In patients refractive to iodine solution,
especially those requiring urgent surgery or those at risk of organ failure from thyrotoxicosis, an alternate modality is needed for
appropriate control of thyroid function. Removal of circulating thyroid hormone by therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) has been reported as a
useful adjunct in these instances (345). We described a patient with GD who underwent successful sequential TPE and RAI therapy. The
efficacy of TPE as an adjunct treatment in the management of GD is also reviewed. A 35-yr-old man with chronic hepatitis-B viral infection
presented to Seoul National University Hospital with a 15-day history of pruritus on April 2013. He also complained of tremor, dyspnea on
exertion, and weight loss of 6 kg over the previous month. Baseline laboratory investigations resulted in a biochemical picture of
hyperthyroidism: total T3, 270 ng/dL (87-184 ng/dL); free T4, 5.79 ng/dL (normal range, 0.70-1.80 ng/dL); TSH, < 0.05 µIU/mL (0.04-4.1
µIU/mL); and TSH receptor antibody, 39.70 IU/L (0-1 IU/L). A thyroid scan showed diffuse glandular enlargement, with a generalized increase
in uptake of Tc-99m, further substantiating a clinical diagnosis of GD. Liver function tests (LFTs) were abnormal from one month previously)
showing slight increases in transaminase levels (AST, 70 IU/L [0-40 IU/L]; ALT, 174 IU/L [0-40 IU/L]) and hyperbilirubinemia (total
bilirubin, 1.8 mg/dL [0.2-1.2 mg/dL]). Based on the clinical diagnosis, methimazole (MMI) 40 mg/day was prescribed. In addition, 5 mg/day
levocetirizine and 20 mg/day propranolol were given to alleviate pruritus and associated symptoms. The next day, the patient presented to
the emergency room, complaining of acute-onset abdominal pain and diarrhea. Even higher elevations of LFTs (AST, 94 IU/L; ALT, 191 IU/L) and
total bilirubin (2.5 mg/dL) were found on laboratory testing, with normal white blood cell (5.16×103/µL ) and differential counts. The cause
of such LFT abnormalities was difficult to ascertain, given that thyrotoxicosis alone, MMI-induced toxicity, and other factors were all
potential etiologies. As a precaution, MMI was withdrawn immediately, and 2 drops Lugol's solution t.i.d was prescribed. Nevertheless,
abnormal LFTs persisted (AST, 99 IU/L; ALT, 168 IU/L; total bilirubin, 6.0 mg/dL) by day 11 of hospitalization (Table 1). At the same time,
the possibility of a diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) or a flare of viral hepatitis was entertained. Testing for antimitochondrial
and anti-smooth muscle antibodies was negative, whereas assay of fluorescent antinuclear antibody proved positive (FANA: 1:40, speckled
pattern). A liver biopsy disclosed histologic features compatible with mixed viral and cholestatic hepatitis, but not AIH. Resistance to the
anti-HBV agents, lami-vudine and adefovir, was also problematic in this patient, calling for a change in medication to 300 mg tenofovir and
1 mg entecavir. The total bilirubin level increased to 9.5 U/L after 2 weeks of the new antiviral regimen, so 30 mg prednisolone was added
with potential AIH in mind. Interestingly, the LFTs improved immediately once prednisolone was started (Table 1). In the 3 weeks during
which Lugol solution was given, serum levels of free T4 and T3 declined gradually to 3.67 ng/dL and 120 ng/dL by day 24 of hospitalization
(Table 2). However, by day 25, both parameters rebounded (free T4, 3.74 ng/dL; T3, 142 ng/dL), suggesting an evolving refractory or escape
phenomenon related to Lugol solution (Table 2). Due to the abnormal LFTs, antithyroid drugs were not an option, so RAI treatment was the
next resort. Unfortunately, the free T4 level was still elevated (3.74 ng/dL) and 2 weeks of iodine restriction was required prior to RAI
treatment, so another strategy was needed to correct the thyroid function. Consequently, 4 courses of TPE were performed via right jugular
vein catheterization. The first two courses involved a centrifuge-driven cell separator (Cobe Spectra; Terumo BCT, Lakewood, CO, USA), which
was not available thereafter because other patient was occupying the machine. A membrane filtration unit (Plasauto EZ Asahi Plasmaflo
OP-05W; Asahi Kasei Medical, Tokyo, Japan) was instead used for the final two courses. ACD-A (with centrifugation) and heparin (with
filtration) were both used as anticoagulants, depending on the occasion. Approximately 3 L of plasma was extracted on each procedure and
replaced with 4% albumin, monitoring vital signs and adverse events in the process. Serum levels of free T4 and T3 were determined after
each TPE session. Following the first two courses of TPE by centrifugation, free T4 level decreased by 33.7%; however, free T4 level
increased by 49.2% after the final two courses of TPE by filtration (Table 2). RAI treatment at a dose of 15 mCi, was administered as
planned after the fourth course of TPE, without any adverse consequences. Serum levels of free T4 (4.38 ng/dL) and T3 (184 ng/dL) were
transiently elevated after RAI treatment but started to fall by day 42 of hospitalization (free T4, 2.27 ng/dL; T3, 114 ng/dL) (Table 2).
The LFT values were also much improved (AST, 47 IU/L; ALT, 55 IU/L; total bilirubin, 4.8 mg/dL), and the patient was discharged on an anti-
HBV regimen plus prednisolone (tapering by 5 mg/week) (Table 1). Levels of thyroid hormone levels were normalized one month after RAI
treatment (Table 2). TPE is a highly effective blood purification procedure used to treat a variety of disorders, such as autoimmune
diseases or severe sepsis (67). It is a safe and useful process whereby blood is separated via centrifugation or filtration into plasma and
cells. The cells are then returned to the patient, replacing the plasma with either donor plasma, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), albumin, or a
similar colloidal solution (6). Because the therapeutic goal of TPE is the removal of harmful substances such as immune complexes,
cytokines, toxins, or hormones, patients with severe hyperthyroidism stand to benefit from this procedure (46). The use of TPE for
controlling thyrotoxicosis was first reported in the 1970s (8). Three thyrotoxic patients, refractory to conventional antithyroid agents,
responded well to TPE and ultimately underwent RAI therapy. Likewise, refractory thyrotoxicosis was a primary indication for TPE in other
earlier reports (349). Two to five courses of TPE were administered in patients with GD or toxic nodular goiter where thyroidal
hyperfunction was not controlled by antithyroid drugs. In some instances, TPE was employed when antithyroid drugs were contraindicated, due
to such adverse effects as agranulocytosis or hepatotoxicity (591011). One retrospective multicenter study analyzed outcomes of TPE in a
relatively large number of thyrotoxic patients (4). When TPE was administered to 22 patients with thyrotoxicosis, 9 with GD, and 13 with
toxic nodules, clinical improvement was observed in most (20/22; 91%). A mean of four TPE courses (range, 2-9 courses) were administered
before proceeding with RAI therapy or surgery, with free T4 levels declining by 41.7%. Our patient displayed a modest reduction in free T4
level after the initial two courses of TPE (33.7% reduction in free T4 from pre-TPE baseline). However, a rebound in thyroid hormone levels
occurred after the next two courses. Of note, the type of TPE unit had changed from centrifugal (initial two courses) to membrane filtration
(subsequent courses) during the treatment period. Previous reports indicate declines of 10%-20% in free T4 levels after each round of TPE,
regardless of whether centrifugal (4911) or membrane filtration (35) unit were used. Centrifugation requires less blood volume and blood
flow rate to achieve similar plasma removal (6) and thus may be more efficient than membrane filtration. However, no comparison studies have
been done to directly evaluate these two methods. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first instance where both methods of TPE have
been applied in the same patient. Although our findings clearly require corroboration through further study, centrifugation seemed superior
to membrane filtration in controlling thyrotoxicosis. On the other hand, it may well be that thyrotoxicosis in this patient was increasing,
making it more difficult for levels of thyroid hormone to be corrected during the latter two courses of TPE, even with equivalent
performance by both machines. Patients generally should be rendered euthyroid before RAI therapy or surgery to prevent the adverse effects
of hyperthyroidism (121314). Although, conventional preparations, including antithyroid drugs, iodine, lithium, and corticosteroids are
often useful (11516), such treatments are sometimes disappointing, as in this case. TPE may be considered as a bridge to other remedies when
thyrotoxicosis cannot be controlled medically or if urgent symptomatic relief from thyrotoxicosis is needed (9). Our patient was accepted
for TPE because there was no evident contraindication to TPE such as hemodynamic instability, active infection, bleeding tendency or
allergic reaction to FFP or albumin (17). Finally, RAI treatment proceeded as planned, even though the levels of thyroid hormone levels did
not normalize. He had no symptoms related to thyrotoxicosis and his thyroid hormone levels were not excessive (i.e., more than three times
the upper normal limit), so RAI therapy was not condtraindicated (1). Thus, TPE helped in transitioning to RAI treatment, without worsening
of thyrotoxicosis and/or provoking related complications. In summary, we were able to adequately stabilize our patient's thyroid function
using TPE, enabling us to proceed with RAI therapy as a more definitive treatment of GD. Because TPE provides only transient improvement in
thyroid function, several courses are mandatory. Our data suggest that TPE is an effective temporizing measure for patients with GD in the
event that all other conventional treatment modalities prove unsuitable or ineffective. DISCLOSURE: The authors have no conflicts of
interest to disclose. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION: Study conception and design: Min SH. Summary of clinical record and interpretation of data: Min
SH, Phung A, Oh TJ, Han KS, Kim MJ, Kim JM, Lee JH. Writing manuscript: Min SH. Critical revision: Park YJ. Manuscript approval: all
authors. AST, aspartate transaminase; ALT, alanine transaminase; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; MMI, methimazole; TPE, therapeutic plasma
exchange; HD, hospital day. Free T4, free thyroxine; T3, triiodotyronine; Ab, antibody; TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone; MMI, methimazole;
TPE, therapeutic plasma exchange; HD, hospital day; Opd, out patient department. *Lugol's solution withdrawn at this time due to escape
phenomenon.
