Nephrogenic adenoma, also referred to nephrogenic metaplasia, is a benign proliferative lesion of urothelium, usually associated with
chronic physical stimuli or inflammation. Familial Mediterranean fever is an inherited autosomal recessive disease characterized by
recurrent short episodes of fever. The site of mutation is found in MEFV gene which controls inflammatory responses. We have experienced a
case of nephrogenic adenoma in a 16-year-old girl with Familial Mediterranean Fever, showing proliferative lesions diffusely in the urinary
bladder and multifocally in the other parts of urinary tract. These lesions disappeared after colchicine treatment. We searched for MEFV
gene mutation using the specimen from the resected urinary bladder and detected heterozygous mutation of E148Q. There is a possibility that
control of inflammation caused by the surgery for vesicoureteral reflux in the local site didn’t work well on the background of heterozygous
mutation of MEFV gene, and as a result, nephrogenic adenoma appeared. This is the first report of a combination of two rare diseases. We
have to be aware that nephrogenic adenoma can occur in association with Familial Mediterranean Fever, and the former condition should be
taken into consideration when rendering a correct pathological diagnosis. Nephrogenic adenoma is a benign tumor-like lesion of the urinary
tract, characterized by a papillary and tubular proliferation of cuboidal cells similar to the epithelial cells of distal renal tubules. It
occurs anywhere in the urinary tract, but it is most frequently found in the bladder . It was first described in 1949 by Davis , and
originally thought to arise from a remnant of mesonephric tissue or metaplasia of the urothelium in response to chronic irritation and
mucosal damage. Currently, it is known that exfoliated and implanted renal tubular cells into the urinary tract mucosa form the disease .
The most common histological pattern is a proliferation of small tubules composed of a single layer of cuboidal epithelium. These tubules
are often surrounded by a hyalinized basement membrane and contain blue mucin in the lumens. It may also grow in papillary, cystic or solid
pattern. Hobnail cells may be seen in papillary growth areas. In cystic pattern, colloid-like eosinophilic secretion or blue-tinged mucin is
frequently observed . Occasionally, clear cells or signet-ring cells can be seen in solid area, which could be confused with poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma. Although it arises commonly in adults, approximately 10 % of the patients are children, and several cases of
even younger patients have been reported in the literature . Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) was first reported as ‘benign paroxysmal
peritonitis’ in 1945 and the current name of the disease was proposed in 1958 . Most of the reported cases are autosomal recessive disease
characterized by recurrent short episodes of fever and pain due to serosal inflammation . In 1997, a responsible gene was cloned and named
MEFV. It encodes a protein pyrin that controls inflammation [11, 12]. Frequent mutations have been found in M694V, M694I, V726A, M680I of
exon10 and, E148Q of exon 2 . This disease is most common in the periodic fever syndrome and characterized by high effectiveness of
colchicine administration . We present the first rare case of nephrogenic adenoma secondary to FMF, occurring throughout the urinary tract.
There has been no such a report in the literature and also, it is very rare that nephrogenic adenoma involves almost the whole mucosa of
urinary tract. A 16-year-old girl presented with disturbed consciousness and was admitted to our hospital under the diagnosis of hypertonic
dehydration. During the pregnancy (32 weeks of gestational age) of her mother (29-year-old at that time), she was born by an urgent cesarean
section for a shock state due to rupture of the right ovary metastasized by gastric cancer. The mother died of gastric cancer at the age of
33. The patient presented with fetal distress syndrome at birth, and thereby had sequelae such as developmental and mental retardation and
epilepsy. Thereafter, she repeated urinary tract infection (UTI) caused by vesicoureteral reflux. However, even after the surgery, remittent
fever came to arise twice or three times a month, but causative bacteria could not be identified by either urinalysis or urine culture.
Leukocytosis and slightly high level of CRP (C-reactive protein) continued to be observed. Immunological test revealed slightly low value of
CH50. On admission, swelling of left kidney was pointed out with the abdominal computed tomography. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed the
left hydroureteronephrosis associated with a bladder mass. In the meantime, the tumor gradually enlarged to fill the whole lumen of the
bladder, and she finally developed bilateral hydroureteronephrosis. As a result, the patient underwent total cystectomy followed by
cutaneous ureterostomy. Grossly, papillary or villous mass totally occupied the bladder lumen measured 7 cm in the maximum diameter
(Fig. 1). Histologically, various patterns of structure were observed. The most predominant pattern was villous architecture with delicate
core vessels, composed of hobnail tumor cells with high N/C ratio (Fig. 2a and b). Areas of small gland proliferation and cystic change were
also seen, both of which had colloid-like eosinophilic secretion in the lumens (Fig. 2c and d). In addition, proliferation of microtubules
was also observed, simulating　poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma or signet-ring cell carcinoma (Fig. 2e and f). Mucin was identified in
PAS/Alcian-blue double staining (Fig. 2g).Fig. 1Gross appearance of resected bladder; Papillary or villous projections are observed in the
lumen of the bladder (a: whole image, b: cut surface)Fig. 2Histologic appearances of nephrogenic adenoma. a The tumor proliferated in very
thin villous pattern with delicate core vessels. b Hobnail structure of the tumor cells with high N/C ratio was identified. Various size of
glands were seen. c Comparatively small glands and (d) large glands with cystic change. Both of them had colloid-like eosinophilic secretion
in the lumens. e, f Microtubular structures were also observed. They were quite similar to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma or signet-
ring cell carcinoma in part. g Mucin could be identified with PAS/Alcian-blue double stain. h Vimentin was diffusely positive with
immunohistochemical analysis. i, j PAX8 was diffusely positive in all histological structures of nephrogenic adenoma. k PAX2 was also
positive. l Ki-67 postive cells were very few Gross appearance of resected bladder; Papillary or villous projections are observed in the
lumen of the bladder (a: whole image, b: cut surface) Histologic appearances of nephrogenic adenoma. a The tumor proliferated in very thin
villous pattern with delicate core vessels. b Hobnail structure of the tumor cells with high N/C ratio was identified. Various size of
glands were seen. c Comparatively small glands and (d) large glands with cystic change. Both of them had colloid-like eosinophilic secretion
in the lumens. e, f Microtubular structures were also observed. They were quite similar to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma or signet-
ring cell carcinoma in part. g Mucin could be identified with PAS/Alcian-blue double stain. h Vimentin was diffusely positive with
immunohistochemical analysis. i, j PAX8 was diffusely positive in all histological structures of nephrogenic adenoma. k PAX2 was also
positive. l Ki-67 postive cells were very few Formaline-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue was cut into sections of 3 μm thickness and
immunostain was performed with the primary antibodies (Table 1) according to the manufacturers’ instructions and visualized employing
Ventana BenchMark ULTRA immunostainer (Ventana Medical Systems, USA). Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for CK7,
α-methyl-acyl-CoA racemase (AMACR), CA19-9, vimentin (Fig. 2h), PAX8 (Fig. 2i and j), PAX2 (Fig. 2k), CD138 and CD10, and negative for p63
and prostate specific protein (PSA). The Ki-67-positive cells were very few (Fig. 2l). In the background, cystitis glandularis with
hypeplastic urothelium was observed with variety of inflammatory cell infiltration, including neutrophils, mast cells and plasma cells.
These histological findings were consistent with nephrogenic adenoma. After surgery, papillary lesion recurred in the bilateral renal
pelvises and nearby ureters, but most of the recurrent lesions disappeared by colchicine treatment.Table 1Summary of antibodies employed in
this caseMarkerAntibodySourceDilutionCK7Anti-Human Cytokeratin 7, monoclonal, Clone OV-TL 12/30Dako, Glostrup, Denmark1:100AMACRAnti-Human
P504S, rabbit monoclonal, Clone 13H4Dako, Glostrup, Denmark1:100CA19-9Anti-CA19-9, mouse monoclonal, Clone BC/121SLEBiocare, Concord,
USA1:100VimentinAnti-Vimentin, mouse monoclonal, Clone V9Dako, Glostrup, Denmark1:100CD138Anti-Human CD138, monoclonal, Clone MI15Dako,
Glostrup, Denmark1:50CD10Anti-CD10, rabbit monoclonal, Clone SP67Roche, Basel, Switzerland1:1 (prediluted)p63Anti-p63, mouse monoclonal,
Clone BC4A4Biocare, Concord, USA1:200PSAAnti-Human Prostate-Specfic Antigen, Clone ER-PR8Dako, Glostrup, Denmark1:50PAX8Anti-Pax8, mouse
monoclonal, Clone BCl2Biocare, Concord, USA1:1 (prediluted)PAX2Anti-Pax2, rabbit monoclonal, Clone EP3251Abcam, Cambridge,
UK1:1000Ki-67Anti-Ki67, rabbit monoclonal, Clone 30-9Roche, Basel, Switzerland1:1 (prediluted) Summary of antibodies employed in this case
Considering the effectiveness of colchicine treatment, we searched for MEFV gene mutations. In Japan, about 100 cases of FMF have been
reported with frequent mutations found in E148Q (exon2) and M694I (exon10), so we searched for these mutations using formalin fixed samples
of this case. Genomic DNA was extracted from 10 FFPE sections of 10 μm thickness using QIAamp DNA FFPE tissue kit (QIAGEN, Venio,
Netherland) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. The following PCR primers were used for amplification of MEFV (exon2 and,
exon10). 5’-AGATGATTCCGCAGCGTCCA-3’(exon2-F), 5’-AGGCTTGCCCTGCGCGTCCA-5’(exon2-R), 5’-TCCTGGGAGCCTGCAAGACA-3’(exon10-F),
5’-AAAGAGCAGCTGGCGAATGT-3’ (exon 10-R). Thermal cycling conditions were 5 min at 94 °C, followed by 35 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 62 °C(exon
2) or 56 °C (exon 10) for 30 s and 72 °C for 1 min followed by a final incubation at 72 °C for 7 min. The PCR products were purified using
QIAquick PCR purification kit (QIAGEN, Venio, Netherland). After purification of PCR products, analyses by capillary electrophoresis on a
3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) were performed. Sequence electropherograms were analyzed by Sequence Analysis
5.2 software (Applied Biosystems). As a result, we could not find any mutations in exon 10 but a heterozygous mutation of E148Q was detected
in exon2 (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Sequence analysis of exon 2. a Heterozygous point mutation of E148Q was detected. b Enlarged view of mutation area.
Spine of blue line is C: cytosine and those of black line are G: guanine of base DNA Sequence analysis of exon 2. a Heterozygous point
mutation of E148Q was detected. b Enlarged view of mutation area. Spine of blue line is C: cytosine and those of black line are G: guanine
of base DNA In the past, nephrogenic adenoma was thought to arise from the remnant of embryogenic mesonephric tissue in the urinary tract,
or from metaplastic change of urothelium due to inflammation or injury. In 1981, Bhagavan et al. examined nephrogenic adenoma
morphologically with electron microscopy and found the presence of Tamm-Horsfall protein . They revealed that this lesion was of mesonephric
origin rather than of metanephric. Based on the fact that the nephrogenic adenoma often occurs in patients who received kidney
transplantation, Mazal et al. in 2002 made a research into the origin of nephrogenic adenoma. They analyzed X and Y chromosomes employing
fluorescence in situ hybridization. In the cases of male recipients from female donors, the cells of nephrogenic adenoma had XX chromosome
pattern, On the contrary, in the cases of female recipients from male donors, the cells had XY chromosome pattern. These results indicated
that origin of nephrogenic adenoma was donor-derived renal cells . Moreover they thought nephrogenic adenoma in extrarenal organs like
urinary bladder was caused by proliferation of cells of renal origin, and showed positive immunostaining of PAX2 . PAX2 is a transcriptional
factor in development and expressed in renal tubular cells and parietal cells of the Bowman’s capsule of gromerulus . PAX2 has recently been
considered to be one of the useful markers for nephrogenic adenoma . “　PAX8, another transcriptional factor, expressed in renal cells is
also positive in nephrogenic adenoma . It is currently thought that dislodged renal tubular epithelial cells are transplanted into the
urinary tract mucosa and engraftment occurs, resulting in the disease . In the present case, repeated urinary tract infection might have
contributed to the development of nephrogenic adenoma. We consider that occurrence of the tumor in renal pelvis of both sides after bladder
extraction supported this hypothesis. About 10 % of the cases with nephrogenic adenoma occur in pediatric age , and show the same
morphological and immunohistochemical features as adult cases . They occur under the specific pathological conditions such as Turner's
syndrome or prune belly syndrome . Multifocal and/or diffuse lesions have also been reported. FMF is known to cause inflammatory conditions
such as peritonitis, pleurisy, arthritis, erysipelas-like erythema and pericarditis. Responsible gene of FMF located at chromosome 16p13.3
encodes a pyrin/marenostrin protein composed of 781 amino acids and consists of 10 exons [11, 12]. Usually, pyrin has N-terminal PYRIN
domain and C-terminal B30.2 domain. Activity of caspase-1 is regulated by ASC (apotosis-associated speck-like protein which contains a
caspase recruitment domain) which bound to PYRIN domain and, B30.2 domain also regulates activity of IL-1β by directely inhibition of
caspase-1 activation [19, 20]. Major mutations of FMF are found in E148Q in exon 2, and M894V, M694I, V726A, and M680I in exon 10 of PYD
[21, 22]. If there is a mutation in exon 10, the diagnosis of FMF can be confirmed. Additionally, if mutations in the other exons, including
heterozygous mutation are detected, colchicine can be utilized not only for a treatment, but also for a diagnosis of FMF variant . In FMF
variants, mutations in exon 1 (E84K), exon 2 (L110P, E148Q, R202Q, G304R), exon 3 (P369S, R408Q) and exon5 (S503C) are known. It is believed
that inflammation is provoked by missense mutations of PYRIN gene which result in loss of suppressive function of inflammasome and increase
of IL-1β production [19, 20]. In our case, only one heterozygous mutation of E148Q (exon2) was observed. There is a report that this
mutation was seen in 20 % of Japanese patients , but the present case was diagnosable as FMF variant, because treatment with colchicine was
very effective. We did not search for other mutations on the chromosome, because most of them are limited at E148Q (exon2) and, M694I (exon
10) in the Japanese patients. Pyrin, located in microtubules and actin , is a protein highly expressed in white blood cells. They are coded
by MEFV gene which regulates inflammatory response by interacting with the cytoskeletons and mutation of this gene probably decreased or
deleted its function . Colchicine also has a function to inhibit the polymerization of microtubules (tubulin). In the present case, not only
white blood cells but also the tumor cells of nephrogenic adenoma were positive for vimentin. This suggests the possibility of expression of
tubulin (component of cytokelaton). Many of the FMF cases are autosomal recessive, and the symptoms are less likely to occur in heterozygous
mutation of E148Q (exon 2), so that the patient might have different mutations to cause the symptoms. To our knowledge, this is the first
report of nephrogenic adenoma in a FMF patient. We speculate that control of inflammation in the local site didn’t work well on the
background of heterozygous mutation of MEFV gene, thus, being triggered by mechanical operation of urinary tract, proliferation of
nephrogenic adenoma was induced. However, an accumulation of the similar cases is mandatory to clearly elucidate the mechanisms of the
disease. Furthermore, we should be aware that nephrogenic adenoma can occur in FMF patients to render a correct diagnosis. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient’s father for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contribution NI carried out the all molecular genetic studies, participated in the sequence alignment and wrote the
manuscript. CA carried out the histological preparation including immunostaining. TT was the attending physician of the patient. KK
performed surgery of the patient. YH gave technical guidance of molecular genetic studies to NI. HH and KI were involved in the follow-up
care of the patient. RM participated in pathological investigations and revised the manuscript. All authors read, edited and approved the
final manuscript. We thank Mr. Masayuki Nagasaki and Ms. Mayuko Uegaki who provided superior technical assistance in immunohistochemistry
and Ms. Hiroko Wada who assisted in molecular biology experiments.
