Metastasized pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors are extremely rare malignancies, especially in children. Therefore, therapeutic options are
limited, and few standardized therapy regimens exist. We report a case of a 14-year-old white girl. In 2011 she was diagnosed with a
metastasized, well-differentiated pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor with expression of synaptophysin and chromogranin A. We describe her
clinical course with special attention to her individual therapeutic regimens while bringing together several disciplines of medicine. In
patients such as ours, surgical intervention may be the only therapy that will lead to long-term survival. Metastasized pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) are rare malignancies, especially in children and young adolescents, for which there is no standard
therapeutic regimen. These lesions carry a poor prognosis. In this report, we present a case of a teenage girl (14-years old at age of first
presentation) with a metastasized well-differentiated PanNET. A multidisciplinary therapeutic approach was designed by pediatric
hematologists-oncologists, pediatric surgeons, visceral surgeons, pediatric radiologists and radio-oncologists. The primary tumor as well as
its metastases have been kept in check to date. The patient is in good condition with little limitation of her daily activities. In 2010, a
14-year-old white girl presented to our hospital and described having symptoms of ongoing abdominal pain of approximately 3 weeks’ duration
that was responsive to analgesic medication. She reported no prior history of nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fever, sweating or weight loss.
Her family history has been uneventful; both parents and a 19-year-old sister are healthy. An abdominal ultrasound taken at that time showed
normal upper abdominal organs and multiple enlarged lymph nodes that had previously been thought to be a reaction to a nonspecific
infection. Her pain increased 2.5 weeks later, resulting in another visit to the emergency room. An abdominal magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) scan revealed a suspicious area in the head of her pancreas, persisting enlarged lymph nodes and unclear liver lesions (Fig. 1 and
Fig. 2).Fig. 1Axial, T2-weighted, half-Fourier single-shot turbo spin-echo hydromagnetic resonance imaging scan of the patient’s abdomen.
Retroperitoneal tissue augmentation of the dorsal pancreas is visualized with contrast enhancement (arrow)Fig. 2Liver metastases. a
T1-weighted hydromagnetic resonance imaging scan of the patient‘s abdomen (Gadovist coronary contrast agent; Bayer HealthCare, Berlin,
Germany) shows multiple hypodense liver lesions (arrows). b Photograph taken during laparoscopy, showing one of the liver metastases Axial,
T2-weighted, half-Fourier single-shot turbo spin-echo hydromagnetic resonance imaging scan of the patient’s abdomen. Retroperitoneal tissue
augmentation of the dorsal pancreas is visualized with contrast enhancement (arrow) Liver metastases. a T1-weighted hydromagnetic resonance
imaging scan of the patient‘s abdomen (Gadovist coronary contrast agent; Bayer HealthCare, Berlin, Germany) shows multiple hypodense liver
lesions (arrows). b Photograph taken during laparoscopy, showing one of the liver metastases A scheduled surgical biopsy was taken after the
patient’s overall condition worsened. In addition to increasing pain, she lost appetite and weight. The histopathological results of the
pancreas and liver examinations revealed a metastasized well-differentiated PanNET with expression of synaptophysin and chromogranin A
(CgA). The outer membrane surface of the tumor cells expressed somatostatin receptor 2 (SSR2), and the active proliferative rate of Ki67 (a
pathological grading marker) was 20 to 25% (Fig. 3). The results of additional bone marrow biopsies were unremarkable.Fig.
3Histopathological findings. Microscopic aspects of primary tumor (a) and liver metastasis (b through f). As shown in hematoxylin and eosin-
stained sections (a, b), the tumor displays an organoid growth pattern with predominant trabecular formations of atypical epithelial cells.
Nuclei show only little to moderate pleomorphism, and the cytoplasm is well formed and sometimes contains vacuoles. On immunohistochemical
examination, tumor cells show positivity for the neuroendocrine markers chromogranin A (c) and synaptophysin (d). Ki67 staining (e) reveals
high proliferative activity. The tumor cells display membranous positivity of the somatostatin receptor 2a (f) Histopathological findings.
Microscopic aspects of primary tumor (a) and liver metastasis (b through f). As shown in hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections (a, b), the
tumor displays an organoid growth pattern with predominant trabecular formations of atypical epithelial cells. Nuclei show only little to
moderate pleomorphism, and the cytoplasm is well formed and sometimes contains vacuoles. On immunohistochemical examination, tumor cells
show positivity for the neuroendocrine markers chromogranin A (c) and synaptophysin (d). Ki67 staining (e) reveals high proliferative
activity. The tumor cells display membranous positivity of the somatostatin receptor 2a (f) Extensive further diagnostic tests were done:
laboratory testing and imaging with computed tomography (CT), 68Ga-DOTA-tyrosine octreotide (68Ga-DOTATOC) positron emission tomography
(PET)-CT, thoracic X-ray, electrocardiography and echocardiography. Her blood work and urine analysis results are shown in Table 1.Table
1Laboratory valuesTestValueNormal rangeGlutamic oxaloacetic transaminase277U/L<35U/LGlutamic pyruvic transaminase342U/L<35U/LAlkaline
phosphatase233U/L55 to 105U/Lγ-Glutamyl transferase339U/L<40U/LTotal bilirubin0.7mg/dl<1mg/dlConjugated
bilirubin0.26mg/dl<0.3mg/dlAmylase81U/L8 to 53U/LLipase143U/L<51U/LUrea2.7mg/dl<6mg/dlCgA293.1U/ml<25U/mlNSE26.5μg/L<17μg/Lβ-
hCG<1IU/ml<5U/mlAFP<1U/ml<8U/mlUrine analysisUnremarkableAFP, α-fetoprotein; β-hCG, Human chorionic gonadotropin, β-subunit; CgA,
Chromogranin A; NSE, Neuron-specific enolase Laboratory values AFP, α-fetoprotein; β-hCG, Human chorionic gonadotropin, β-subunit; CgA,
Chromogranin A; NSE, Neuron-specific enolase In proximity to the previously described lesions, a widely spreading tumor with extensive
surrounding of her superior mesenteric artery and her common hepatic artery was detected on imaging studies. Compression of her splenic vein
and her superior mesenteric vein, as well as obstruction of her portal vein with subsequent intestine vein insufficiency and cholestasis,
was also diagnosed. These anatomic findings prompted us to refrain from a (primary) curative surgical approach because of possible life-
threatening circumstances. On the basis of these diagnostic test results, an interdisciplinary decision was made to downsize the tumor with
an intra-arterial 4-GBq Lu-177/4-GBq yttrium (Y)-90-DOTATOC therapy in combination with an oral radiosensitizing chemotherapy with
temozolomide (5 days) and thalidomide (4 days) as an individual approach 2 weeks later. Because of an expected aplasia and the main concern
of weakening her overall condition, as well as to avoid endangering the planned extended surgical procedures, cisplatin and etoposide were
not used. Despite these interventions, her condition continued to worsen. Acute pancreatitis and biliary complications developed. Analgesic
treatment failed to relieve her pain. As a result, surgery was indicated, despite the increased risk for potentially fatal complications.
Surgery with tumor resection took place in the same month. The following steps were performed: (1) extended pancreatic head resection,
duodenectomy and cholecystectomy; (2) placement of a temporary GORE-TEX mesenteric-caval shunt and a temporary arterial aortohepatic shunt;
(3) distal gastric resection with reconstruction with gastrojejunostomy (end to side), pancreaticojejunostomy and hepaticojejunostomy; (4)
right hemicolectomy with terminal ileostomy and Hartmann procedure; (5) extended soft tissue resection, including the whole mesenteric root;
(6) resection of the portal vein with vessel interpolation by the femoral superficial vein (from left adductor channel); (7) reconstruction
of the hepatic artery with end-to-end anastomosis on the celiac trunk; and (8) atypical segmental liver resection of one metastasis (segment
2/3) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Situs. a Intraoperative photograph of temporal placement of a mesenteric-caval GORE-TEX (*) shunt (GORE Medical,
Flagstaff, AZ, USA) and a temporal arterial aortohepatic shunt (+). b Intraoperative photograph taken after extended resection Situs. a
Intraoperative photograph of temporal placement of a mesenteric-caval GORE-TEX (*) shunt (GORE Medical, Flagstaff, AZ, USA) and a temporal
arterial aortohepatic shunt (+). b Intraoperative photograph taken after extended resection The patient recovered without major
complications and could finally be dismissed with home parenteral nutrition 4 weeks later. The first DOTATOC-PET scan obtained
postoperatively showed two remaining small, right-sided liver metastases in segments 6 and 8. Six weeks later, a right hemihepatectomy
without touching the primarily made biliodigestive anastomosis was performed as planned, followed by another DOTATOC-PET scan 1 month later.
We detected that the patient was having a good response to therapy without signs of residual tumor. However, splenomegaly with high DOTATOC
uptake was diagnosed. Because of the importance of the nucleotide therapy with aspired further consolidating circles and the vanished option
for intra-arterial application owing to the resective surgery, splenectomy was the only opportunity to guarantee successful intravenous
DOTATOC therapy. Therefore, a splenectomy was performed. In the same procedure, the ileostomy was taken down. The next intravenous
Lu-177/DOTATOC therapy was done. In the same month (6 months after the histopathological specimen results), an oral tyrosine kinase
inhibitor medication with sunitinib was initiated. A follow-up examination 2 months later with DOTATOC-PET and MRI scans was unremarkable.
The patient recovered in a rehabilitation unit without being dependent on parenteral nutrition any longer. Unfortunately, the next follow up
DOTATOC-PET scan taken 1 year later showed increased uptake in her para-aortal lymph nodes and left inguinal soft tissue, so metastases of
the primary tumor were expected (Fig. 5). Surgical extirpation of the suspicious left-sided inguinal lesion confirmed this hypothesis. The
same endocrine malignant tumor cells could be seen (Ki-67: 30%; SSR2/DOTATOC-positive). Consequently, a para-aortic lymphadenectomy was
performed.Fig. 5Axial computed tomographic scan without contrast agent displaying left inguinal soft tissue. Suspicious hyperdense,
irregularly shaped lesion (arrow) with a diameter of approximately 8mm in the left inguinal soft tissue Axial computed tomographic scan
without contrast agent displaying left inguinal soft tissue. Suspicious hyperdense, irregularly shaped lesion (arrow) with a diameter of
approximately 8mm in the left inguinal soft tissue Afterward, the patient additionally received intravenous Y-90-DOTATOC therapy. Despite
those interventions, the next DOTATOC-PET scan still showed suspicious para-aortic lymph nodes. Repeat resection of the para-aortic lymph
nodes was performed, followed by intravenous Ac-225-DOTATOC therapy. Owing to the stable oncologic situation and regarding the cumulative
dose of radioactivity, with its increasing risk of chronic nephrotoxicity and bone marrow toxicity, no further nuclear medical therapy was
planned as of this writing. Meanwhile, somatostatin (SST) analogue therapy with Somatuline Autogel® 60mg (IPSEN, Signes, France), a long-
lasting lanreotide option (injected subcutaneously once per month), as a non-radioactive blockade of tumor receptors was started to achieve
remission. The follow-up screening with DOTATOC-PET/CT 1.5 years after her first diagnosis indicated nonspecific nuclide uptake in her right
breast and in one left-sided inguinal lymph node, as well as new high nuclide uptake in the right temporobasal part of her brain. Subsequent
MRI of her brain confirmed a noticeable lesion raising strong suspicion of cranial metastases. Those lesions were irradiated with the
patient in stereotactic positioning, and a good response was observed on the next MRI. In another surgical intervention, the left-sided
inguinal lymph node was removed, which was pathologically confirmed as a metastasis of the primary tumor. The patient reports that she is
unaffected and repeat imaging is scheduled at short intervals to ensure regular follow-up. The case presentation is summarized in
Fig. 6.Fig. 6Timeline of the patient’s history. DOTATOC 68Ga-DOTA-tyrosine octreotide, LK lymph nodes Timeline of the patient’s history.
DOTATOC 68Ga-DOTA-tyrosine octreotide, LK lymph nodes PanNETs are rare pancreatic neoplasms compared with their more common exocrine
counterparts. Arising from the pancreatic islets of Langerhans, they are also called islet cell tumors. They occur in 1 to 2 of 100,000
cases per year, accounting for less than 2% of all digestive malignant tumors and less than 1% of endocrine tumors. PanNETs represent
approximately 3% of primary pancreatic neoplasms. Although they may manifest at any age, they most often occur in the fourth to sixth
decades of life [1, 2]. Classically, PanNETs are divided into two groups: functioning pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (F-PanNETs) and non-
functioning pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NF-PanNETs). F-PanNETs are hormonally active and may lead to earlier diagnosis because of
their hormone-related symptoms. Common types are insulinoma and gastrinoma, and rare types are VIPoma (vasoactive intestinal peptide),
glucagonoma or somatostatinoma. For example, insulinomas often present with hypoglycemic symptoms and low blood glucose levels and are
reversible after glucose intake; gastrinomas present with diarrhea, hypergastrinemia, gastric acid hypersecretion and peptic ulcer
diathesis, known as Zollinger–Ellison syndrome . Although NF-PanNETs secrete a number of substances such as chromogranin, synaptophysin,
neuron-specific enolase, pancreatic polypeptide and ghrelin, in contrast to F-PanNETs they do not present clinically with hormone-related
symptoms. As a result, they often present later in the course of the disease with symptoms such as abdominal pain (35 to 75%), weight loss
(20 to 35%) and anorexia and nausea (45%). Less frequent signs include obstructive jaundice (17 to 50%), intra-abdominal hemorrhage (4 to
20%) or a palpable mass (7 to 40%). Symptoms may also be attributable to metastatic disease, which occurs in, for example, the liver or
bones (between 32 and 73% of cases are metastatic at diagnosis). NF-PanNETs may occur in association with the multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 1 syndrome, von Hippel–Lindau syndrome, neurofibromatosis type 1 and tuberous sclerosis . Genetic analyses were not performed in our
patient. Nevertheless, considering the association of PanNETs with familial syndromes, this is an important issue, especially in young
patients with PanNETs. There are different possibilities for a diagnostic strategy: abdominal ultrasound, endoscopic ultrasound, abdominal
CT, abdominal MRI, SST receptor scintigraphy, 68Ga-DOTATOC-PET/CT with a higher spatial resolution than scintigraphy, fine-needle aspiration
cytology and/or biopsy, and laboratory tests with CgA [5, 6]. The 2010 World Health Organization classification system distinguishes between
poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs) versus well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). All NECs are graded G3 with
a Ki67 index greater than 20%. NETs are divided into G2 grade with a Ki67 index of 3 to 20% and G1 grade with a Ki67 index of 2% or less.
Most pancreatic non-functioning (NF) neuroendocrine neoplasms are well differentiated (that is, NETs); NF-NECs are uncommon . In the present
case, our patient has been diagnosed with a well-differentiated NF-NEC, despite a Ki67 index of 20 to 25%, with a TNM classification of
ypT3, ypN1(8/31), ypM1(liver) according to European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society consensus guidelines. Poorly differentiated pancreatic
neuroendocrine neoplasms are characterized by their aggressive tumor biology, absence of SST receptors and poor prognosis. Clinical
management involves a multidisciplinary approach, but surgery remains the only curative therapy for early-stage disease. It represents the
treatment of choice in cases of localized PanNETs, including typical and atypical resections. In particular, radical resection of pancreatic
tumors is associated with favorable long-term outcomes in children and adolescents . Palliative surgery of locally advanced PanNETs is
justified in selected patients. For patients with metastatic NF tumors, surgery of the primary tumor is recommended only for G1 and G2.
Further treatment options are SST analogues (for example, octreotide or lanreotide) for subgroups of patients with slowly progressive, low
proliferative PanNETs; systemic chemotherapy (such as streptozotocin, 5-fluorouracil or doxorubicin) in all PanNETs and NECs; peptide
radionuclide receptor therapy (PRRT; SST analogues labeled with β-emitting radionuclides such as Y-90-DOTATOC) for patients with NETs with
the presence of SST receptors; hepatic artery embolization or chemoembolization in patients with liver metastases who are not candidates for
surgical resection; radiofrequency ablation in patients with unresectable metastases more than 5 to 7cm in diameter; radiotherapy using
high-energy isotope treatment for patients with inoperable disease; immunotherapy (for example, interferon, dendritic cell immunotherapy),
which may be used to offer hormone-related symptom control to patients in whom SST analogue therapy has failed; and molecular targeted
therapy (including anti-epidermal growth factor receptor or anti-vascular endothelial growth factor receptor therapy such as sunitinib) for
individual attempts and future options [1, 3, 8]. In our patient, a primary curative surgical approach could not be used, owing to the
anatomic findings of the spreading tumor. As the initial PRRT (with Y-90-DOTATOC) combined with chemotherapy (temozolomide and thalidomide)
failed , surgery convincingly emerged as the patient’s last chance of potentially surviving. Successful treatments to that point of the
patient’s medical history involved different therapy options mainly combined repeated cycles of intravenous DOTATOC therapy with different
surgical attempts, including resection of metastases and radiotherapy of the brain metastases. As shown, the patient’s best chance of
surviving is an individual approach combining all therapeutic options, and, in our patient, radical surgery was the most important part. The
median overall survival for patients with NF-PanNETs is reportedly approximately 38 months. Patients with distant metastases have a median
survival of 23 months, as compared with 70 to 124 months for those with localized disease . Our patient is living and has a good quality of
life approximately 42 months since the time of her first diagnosis. PanNETs are rare tumors that often invade adjacent organs and anatomic
structures, causing symptoms. Because of its rarity, randomized controlled studies have not been done and current treatment recommendations
are based primarily on case series and individual treatment approaches. So far, total resection of the tumor is the treatment of choice and
seems to be associated with the best prognosis, particularly when accompanied by further different therapies as mentioned above.
Unresectable or partially resectable tumors and recurrent tumors can be treated with local and/or systemic radiation (PRRT) and/or adjuvant
chemotherapy to downsize the tumor. Even then, surgery seems to be an important intervention option, which gives the patient relief from
symptoms. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardian (and herself) for publication of this case report and
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Computed tomography DOTA-
tyrosine octreotide Functioning pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor Magnetic resonance imaging Neuroendocrine carcinoma Neuroendocrine tumor
Non-functioning Non-functioning pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor Positron emission tomography Peptide
receptor radionuclide therapy Somatostatin receptor 2 Somatostatin Yttrium Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions TT, SHC and PG analyzed and interpreted the patient data regarding the presented case and were
major contributors in writing the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank the patient and her
family for their assistance and for providing consent for publication of this case report. The authors also thank the Institute of
Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, for support of this study.
