Pyogenic granuloma (PG) is a polypoid lobular capillary hemangioma rarely observed in the gastrointestinal tract. Only a few cases in the
small bowel have been described in the literature. A 58-year-old man had been suffering from general fatigue and severe anemia.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy did not reveal any significant bleeding. Abdominal computer tomography revealed a hypervascular
tumor in the small intestine. Oral double-balloon endoscopy (DBE) detected a polypoid lesion (2 cm in diameter) in the jejunum. We performed
laparoscopic-assisted partial resection of the jejunum. The histological features of the tumor were consistent with PG. The patient’s anemia
gradually improved without the need for oral iron after surgery. In this case report, we present a case of pyogenic granuloma in in the
jejunum that was detected by DBE. Obscure gastrointestinal bleeding (OGIB) is frequently observed in the small intestine. Double-balloon
endoscopy (DBE) and capsule endoscopy (CE) are highly effective in diagnosing the origin of OGIB [1, 2]. DBE is particularly valuable for
the detection and diagnosis of small bowel tumors, and biopsies and therapeutic procedures have also become possible . Pyogenic granuloma
(PG) is a capillary hemangioma that usually occurs on the skin or in the oral cavity; it is rarely observed in the gastrointestinal tract.
We report a case of PG in the jejunum that was detected by DBE. A 58-year-old man had been suffering from general fatigue and severe anemia
for several months. His hemoglobin levels were 6.6 g/dl (normal range: 12–16 g/dl). He had no medical history and did not take any medicine.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy did not reveal any significant bleeding. Abdominal computer tomography revealed a 2-cm
hypervascular tumor in the small intestine (Fig. 1). Oral DBE detected a 2-cm-diameter reddish, submucosal tumor-like lesion with surface
ulceration in the jejunum, approximately 20 cm away from the Treitz ligament (Fig. 2). We did not perform biopsy because it can be difficult
to stop bleeding in the case of hypervascular lesions. Under the diagnosis of a small bowel tumor, gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST),
malignant lymphoma, or cancer, we performed laparoscopic-assisted segmental resection of the jejunum with the dissection of lymph nodes.Fig.
1Abdominal enhanced computed tomography showing a 2-cm hypervascular tumor in the small intestineFig. 2Double-balloon endoscopy findings of
a submucosal tumor with surface ulceration in the jejunum Abdominal enhanced computed tomography showing a 2-cm hypervascular tumor in the
small intestine Double-balloon endoscopy findings of a submucosal tumor with surface ulceration in the jejunum Examination of the resected
tumor showed that it measured 19 × 16 mm in diameter (Fig. 3). Histology revealed the proliferation of blood capillaries and granulation
tissue, which was consistent with PG (Fig. 4). The patient was discharged on postoperative day 9 without complication and his anemia
improved gradually without the need for oral iron after surgery.Fig. 3Macroscopic appearance of the resected tumor showing a 19 × 16 mm
subpedunculated polyp with surface ulcerationFig. 4Microscopic appearance of the hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained resected specimen. a
Low-power view of the histological features. b High-power view of the histological features (original magnification: ×100). Proliferation
and lobular arrangement of capillary-sized blood vessels can be observed along with inflamed and edematous stroma and endothelial cell
swelling. Remarkable inflammatory cell invasion and granulation tissues are noted in the capillaries and granulation tissue. c Positive
immunostaining for CD31 in capillary endothelial cells Macroscopic appearance of the resected tumor showing a 19 × 16 mm subpedunculated
polyp with surface ulceration Microscopic appearance of the hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained resected specimen. a Low-power view of the
histological features. b High-power view of the histological features (original magnification: ×100). Proliferation and lobular arrangement
of capillary-sized blood vessels can be observed along with inflamed and edematous stroma and endothelial cell swelling. Remarkable
inflammatory cell invasion and granulation tissues are noted in the capillaries and granulation tissue. c Positive immunostaining for CD31
in capillary endothelial cells PG, also called granuloma telangiectaticum or lobular capillary hemangioma, was first described in 1897.
Gastrointestinal PG is apparently a rare cause of hemorrhage in the digestive tract. PG is a benign lesion that is considered reactive,
e.g., it occurs as a result of minor trauma. However, the precise etiology is unknown. Satellite lesions have been described on the skin,
which argues against trauma as the sole cause. Lesions are also found more frequently during pregnancy on the skin and in the mouth,
suggesting that hormonal influences may also play a role. All gastrointestinal PGs reported thus far have occurred in elderly patients, both
male and female . The distinctive histopathological characteristics of PGs are proliferation and lobular arrangement of capillary-sized
vessels with inflamed and edematous stroma and endothelial cell swelling cells . To our knowledge, only 16 cases of PG in the small
intestine have been described in the literature, and most involved Japanese patients (Table 1). This may be due to the development of DBE
for examination of the small bowel in Japan. Including our case, the average age of the 17 patients was 58.1 years (range: 26–86 years),
with no significant difference between males and females.Table 1Summary of the reported cases of PG in the small
intestineAuthorYearAge/SexSymptomsHb (g/dl)LocationSize (mm)TreatmentPayson 196745/FAbdominal pain12.4Ileum60Surgical resectionMeuwissen
198637/MNoneNAIleumNALaser ablationIwakubo 198930/FMelena4.8Ileum8 × 8Surgical resectionHizawa 199326/FNoneNAIleumNASurgical resectionYao
199571/FAnemiaNAIleum24Surgical resectionYao 199556/MMelenaNAJejunum20Surgical resectionMotohashi 199958/FAnemia6.1Ileum25 × 30Surgical
resectionVan Eden 200455/FAnemiaNAIleum9Surgical resectionShirakawa 200772/MAnemiaNAIleumNAEMRCHO 200958/MMelena5Ileum10Surgical
resectionMoffat 200978/MAnemia6.2Jejunum20Surgical resectionNagoya 200963/FAnemia4Ileum7EMRKuga 200955/MAnemia9.9Jejunum4EMRYamashita
201361/MAnemiaNAIleum15Surgical resectionKatsurahara 201565/MAnemiaNAJejunum33Surgical resectionKikuchi 201586/FAnemia8.1Ileum7Surgical
resectionThis case201558/MAnemia6.6Jejunum19Surgical resection NA data not available Summary of the reported cases of PG in the small
intestine NA data not available The tumor size is usually less than 20 mm, with a clinical presentation of anemia. Of the 17 reported cases,
12 involved the ileum and 5 involved the jejunum. Most tumors had an irregular shape without surface ulceration and were reddish in color.
Surgical resection is the mainstay for treating small bowel PGs, although endoscopic resection with an electrosurgical snare is an
alternative technique if an endoscopic approach is possible. Endoscopic treatment is a relatively easy, safe, and low-cost procedure for
small-sized PGs of the gastrointestinal tract . However, when resecting PGs, it is important that arteriovenous anastomosis under the tumor
is included endoscopically, because incomplete resection may cause recurrence . In the present case, we performed laparoscopic-assisted
partial resection because complete endoscopic resection of the 2-cm hypervascular submucosal tumor with ulceration seemed to be difficult.
PG in the small intestine is a rare cause of anemia and is difficult to detect. Awareness regarding this infrequent benign lesion will make
it easier to diagnose and treat it properly. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
any accompanying images. Pyogenic granuloma Obscure gastrointestinal bleeding Double-balloon endoscopy Capsule endoscopy Gastrointestinal
stromal tumor Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contribution SN, TM, SY, MH, and OO
performed endoscopic procedures. SM, HS, AK, YK, and HT managed the patients and performed operation. HO diagnosed pathologically. SM wrote
the manuscript and KY and HT reviewed it. All authors approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information Not applicable. We acknowledgement
Enago for the English language review.
