Nonimmune-mediated glomerulonephropathies are rarely reported in domestic animals with the exception of amyloidosis. Here we describe the
pathological features and clinical course of a feline with protein-losing nonimmune-mediated glomerulonephropathy characterized by segmental
glomerulosclerosis and severe podocyte injury. A castrated male Japanese domestic cat aged 3 years and 8 months had hypertension, persistent
proteinuria, and azotemia. Microscopic examination of a renal biopsy revealed many glomeruli with adhesion to the Bowman’s capsule and
segmental sclerosis. The most characteristic ultrastructural glomerular feature was severe podocyte foot process effacement. No electron-
dense deposits were observed. Immunofluorescence revealed no immune deposits, but abnormal expression of nephrin and podocin was detected in
the glomeruli. These findings resemble those of human focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. The cat temporarily responded to treatment with
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and prednisolone administration but died of progressive renal failure 32 months after biopsy. The
cat was diagnosed with nonimmune mediated glomerulonephropathy because of the absence of immune deposits and severe podocyte injury. To our
knowledge, this is the first report of nonimmune-mediated glomerulonephropathy in a cat resembling human focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
Immune-mediated glomerulonephritis has been reported in dogs and cats as a common renal disease that causes chronic renal failure ; however,
with the exception of amyloidosis, nonimmune-mediated glomerulonephropathies are rarely reported in domestic animals. Here we describe the
pathological features and clinical course of a cat with protein-losing nonimmune-mediated glomerulonephropathy characterized by segmental
glomerulosclerosis and severe podocyte injury. This Japanese domestic cat was a castrated male aged 3 years and 8 months with anorexia,
weight loss, and polyuria/polydipsia for a few months. Clinical examinations before treatment and renal biopsy revealed a heart murmur,
hypertension (systolic blood pressure of 220 and 160 mmHg at 10 and 5 days before biopsy, respectively), renal enlargement, and
abnormalities of blood biochemistry and urinalysis, such as azotemia (Fig. 1) and persistent proteinuria (a urinary protein-to-creatinine
ratio of 2.19 and 300–1000 mg/dL protein level using reagent strips).Fig. 1Treatment and changes in the levels of blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
and serum creatinine (Cre) during the disease course Treatment and changes in the levels of blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine
(Cre) during the disease course Two-third of the renal biopsy tissue obtained from the cat was fixed in 10 % neutral-buffered formalin and
embedded in paraffin wax. After processing, sections (3 μm) were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) for
histological examination. For immunofluorescence (IF) using goat anti-nephrin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) or rabbit anti-
podocin (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) antibodies, dewaxed sections were pretreated with Target Retrieval Solution, pH 9.0 (Nichirei
Corp., Tokyo, Japan) at 121 °C for 5 min in an autoclave for nephrin or with trypsin (Sigma; T7168) at 37 °C for 30 min for podocin. The
secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated rabbit anti-goat immunoglobulin (Ig)G (Invitrogen, Tokyo, Japan) or Alexa Fluor
488-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Invitrogen). Renal tissue from a 10-year-old female mixed breed cat with mild and focal interstitial
nephritis was used for comparison. A small piece of fresh biopsy tissue was embedded in an optimal cutting temperature compound (Sakura
Finetek, Tokyo, Japan). Cryosections and paraffin sections were prepared to detect immune deposits. Direct IF studies using fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated anti-cat IgG (Kirkegaard & Perry Laboratories, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, USA) and indirect immunostaining
using anti-cat C3 primary antibodies (Biogenesis, Poole, UK) and FITC-conjugated secondary antibodies (Chemicon, Temecula, California) were
performed. An FSX100 fluorescence microscope (OLYMPUS, Tokyo, Japan) was used for examination. For ultrastructural examination, another
small piece of the biopsy tissue was fixed in 2.5 % glutaraldehyde and postfixed in 1 % OsO4. Fixed specimens were then dehydrated using
ascending grades of alcohol and embedded in epoxy resin. Ultrathin sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and observed
using a JEOL 1210 transmission electron microscope (JOEL, Tokyo, Japan) at 80 k. The treatment and levels of blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and
serum creatinine (Cre) during the disease course are shown in Fig. 1. After renal biopsy, the administration of a sustained course of
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (benazepril, Novartis Pharma K.K., Tokyo, Japan) and a tapering course of prednisolone were
immediately started. For approximately 1 year, the levels of BUN and Cre were decreased. However, approximately 15 months later, both levels
gradually began to increase. Amlodipine and prednisolone were administered without any noticeable effect. The cat died from the progression
of renal failure with anorexia and anemia approximately 32 months after renal biopsy. During the disease course, persistent proteinuria
(30–100 mg/dl using reagent strips) was observed despite treatment. Necropsy was not allowed by the owner. Microscopically, the biopsy
specimen contained 12 glomeruli with the following characteristics: one showed global sclerosis (8.3 %), four (33.3 %) showed adhesion to
the Bowman’s capsule, and four (33.3 %) showed segmental sclerosis with increased matrix (Fig. 2). The regions without sclerosis or adhesion
in these affected glomeruli and the remaining three (25 %) glomeruli appeared normal, except for occasional hyaline droplets in the
podocytes. Diffuse mononuclear-cell infiltration and fibrosis were observed in the interstitium.Fig. 2Light microscopic features of the
biopsy specimen: (a) low magnification and (b to d) high magnification images of the glomeruli. Infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells
in the interstitium, severe interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy were observed (a). The glomeruli show global sclerosis (b), multiple
adhesion to Bowman’s capsule (c: arrowheads), segmental sclerosis with increased matrix and adhesion (d: arrowheads) and occasional hyaline
droplets in podocyte cell bodies (d: arrow). Periodic acid-Schiff stain. Scale bars: 30 μm Light microscopic features of the biopsy
specimen: (a) low magnification and (b to d) high magnification images of the glomeruli. Infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells in the
interstitium, severe interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy were observed (a). The glomeruli show global sclerosis (b), multiple adhesion
to Bowman’s capsule (c: arrowheads), segmental sclerosis with increased matrix and adhesion (d: arrowheads) and occasional hyaline droplets
in podocyte cell bodies (d: arrow). Periodic acid-Schiff stain. Scale bars: 30 μm Examination using transmission electron microscopy
revealed a distinct lesion in the glomeruli characterized by severe and global foot process (FP) effacement without electron-dense deposits,
and there were no obvious glomerular basement membrane (GBM) abnormalities or cellular infiltration (Fig. 3) The podocytes had global
changes such as cytoplasmic vacuolation, the formation of tight junctions between FPs, and microvilli formation on the free surface.Fig.
3Transmission electron microscopic features of the biopsy specimen: (a) low and (b) high magnifications of a region in the frame in (a).
Severe and global foot process effacement (arrowheads), vacuolization (asterisks), formation of microvilli (arrows), and tight junctions
between foot processes (white arrowheads) are observed. CL, capillary lumen; Ed, endothelial cell; FP, foot process; GBM, glomerular
basement membrane; Me, mesangial cell; Po, podocyte; US, urinary space. TEM, transmission electron microscopy. Scale bars: 2 μm Transmission
electron microscopic features of the biopsy specimen: (a) low and (b) high magnifications of a region in the frame in (a). Severe and global
foot process effacement (arrowheads), vacuolization (asterisks), formation of microvilli (arrows), and tight junctions between foot
processes (white arrowheads) are observed. CL, capillary lumen; Ed, endothelial cell; FP, foot process; GBM, glomerular basement membrane;
Me, mesangial cell; Po, podocyte; US, urinary space. TEM, transmission electron microscopy. Scale bars: 2 μm Immunohistochemical analysis
did not detect the deposition of IgG and C3 in the glomeruli (Fig. 4). In the normal cat glomeruli, the labeling of nephrin and podocin
exhibited a sharp, linear pattern along the GBM, as previously reported. In contrast, in the present case, the expression of those proteins
was decreased, and the labeling pattern was granular (Fig. 5).Fig. 4Immunofluorescence analysis of IgG and C3 expression in the glomeruli.
No signal for feline IgG (a) and C3 (b) was observed in the glomeruli. Scale bars: 30 μmFig. 5Immunofluorescence analysis of nephrin and
podocin expression in the glomeruli. Expression of nephrin and podocin (c and d) was decreased, and staining exhibited a coarse granular
pattern compared with the sharp linear pattern of normal glomeruli (a and b). Scale bars: 30 μm Immunofluorescence analysis of IgG and C3
expression in the glomeruli. No signal for feline IgG (a) and C3 (b) was observed in the glomeruli. Scale bars: 30 μm Immunofluorescence
analysis of nephrin and podocin expression in the glomeruli. Expression of nephrin and podocin (c and d) was decreased, and staining
exhibited a coarse granular pattern compared with the sharp linear pattern of normal glomeruli (a and b). Scale bars: 30 μm We regarded this
renal biopsy case as a primary glomerulonephropathy with tubulointerstitial changes. Although the light microscopic findings were similar to
those of chronic interstitial nephritis (CIN), which is the most common renal disease of cats , feline CIN commonly develops in animals
older than this one and is not accompanied by persistent proteinuria. Podocyte injury is closely related to proteinuria, and persistent
proteinuria causes tubulointerstitial injury as a common mechanism of proteinuric nephropathy in humans and animals . Nephrin and podocin
are expressed in FPs and slit diaphragms and play a critical role in selective filtration. Altered expression of these proteins indicates
podocyte injury related to proteinuria in humans and in animal models . Therefore, in addition to ultrastructural changes, decreased
expression and the altered expression pattern of nephrin and podocin indicate that podocyte injury and dysfunction likely occurred as a
primary event in the present case. The histopathological, IF, and electron microscopic findings suggested nonimmune-mediated pathogenesis in
the present case. Nonimmune-mediated glomerulonephropathy related to podocyte injury in cats has been rarely reported, and to our knowledge,
there is only one report of minimal-change glomerulopathy in a cat in which the renal glomeruli show severe FP effacement without
glomerulosclerosis. In the present study, the glomeruli showed irreversible lesions such as adhesion and sclerosis as well as severe
podocyte injury, and these morphological changes resemble those of human focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). FSGS is a major cause of
nephrotic syndrome and subsequent progression to end-stage renal disease in humans [10, 11], which was also reported in a dog . The
diagnosis of FSGS is based on the following light microscopic findings: glomerular sclerosis and tuft collapse are focal (some glomeruli,
but not all) and segmental (a segment of the glomerulus is affected). However, in practice, diffuse or global glomerulosclerosis is
sometimes observed in human and canine FSGS and its animal models, depending on the disease stage [8, 12, 13]. Therefore, the renal disease
in the present case may be more advanced stage of FSGS, because of high frequency of affected glomeruli and tubulointerstitial lesions in
association with renal failure. The key pathogenic mechanism of FSGS is the progressive damage of podocytes and their detachment from the
GBM followed by capillary tuft adhesion to the Bowman’s capsule and sclerosis [10, 11]. FSGS encompasses a number of clinicopathologic
syndromes sharing this common glomerular lesion, including primary (or idiopathic) and secondary FSGS (related to a variety of causes).
Hypertension is an important underlying comorbidity in humans with secondary FSGS . However, hypertension in the present case might have
been caused by chronic renal failure, and its relationship to the pathogenesis of FSGS is unclear because of the lack of long-term
monitoring of blood pressure. FSGS in humans is less responsive to steroid therapy [11, 14]. Here the cat temporarily responded to an ACE
inhibitor and steroid therapy but died due to the progression of renal failure. However, as previously mentioned, renal function was
diminished at the time of renal biopsy, and we were therefore unable to evaluate the exact therapeutic effect. This case report demonstrates
the importance of examination of renal biopsies using IF and electron microscopy as well as light microscopy. Moreover, to our knowledge,
this is the first report of nonimmune-mediated glomerulonephropathy in a cat that resembles human FSGS. Hematoxylin and eosin Periodic acid-
Schiff Immunofluorescence Blood urea nitrogen Creatinine Angiotensin-converting enzyme Foot process Glomerular basement membrane Chronic
interstitial nephritis Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions SH performed the clinical examination, renal biopsy, and treatment. GS performed histological, ultrastructural, and
immunohistochemical analysis and drafted the manuscript. KS and GS made the final diagnosis of the case and wrote the manuscript. JK and TM
discussed this case with other authors and critically reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’
information Not applicable. This Research was partially supported by a research project grant (2014 K05) awarded by the Azabu University.
