Granular cell tumors (GCTs) are soft tissue tumors, which are thought to be derived from Schwann cells. Although most GCTs are reported to
arise in tongue and oral cavity (30-50%), they can appear on any anatomic sites, even visceral organs. Herein, we report 5 cases of GCTs on
unusual anatomic locations, such as palm, arm, thigh, finger, and vulvar area. Complete surgical excision is preferred treatment of choice
to prevent recurrence. These cases emphasize that GCTs not involving oral cavity are more prevalent than expected, and the diagnosis should
be histopathologically confirmed. Granular cell tumors (GCTs) are uncommon soft tissue tumors, considered to be derived from peripheral
nerves, particularly Schwann cells. Although most GCTs are localized in the head and neck regions, they can appear on any anatomic sites,
including extremities, genitalia, and even visceral organs.12 Herein, we report 5 cases of GCTs on unusual anatomic locations. A previously
healthy 9-year-old girl presented with a solitary non-tender skin-colored 1×1 cm-sized slightly raised papule on right forearm (Fig. 1A).
The presumptive differential diagnosis included dermatofibroma. Punch biopsy showed a dermal tumor composed of nests of large polygonal
cells containing abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with fine granules, consistent with GCT (Fig. 2A). S-100 was positive in tumor cells (Fig.
2B). The tumor was totally excised without recurrence for 4 years. A 26-year-old female complained of a solitary bean-sized brownish nodule
on right palm for 3 years (Fig. 1B). There had been intermittent tenderness, but no difficulties in movement of palm and fingers. Initially,
dermatofibroma and schwannoma were clinically suspected. Histopathology demonstrated a well-circumscribed dermal proliferation of cells with
small oval nuclei and abundant pink granular cytoplasm arranged in fascicles (Fig. 2C). The tumor cells were stained with S-100 (Fig. 2D).
The tumor was surgically removed with no evidence of recurrence for 5 years. A 69-year-old female patient presented with a linear depression
on nail plate with matchhead-sized hyperpigmented crust on right middle fingernail (Fig. 1C). The lesion was intermittently painful.
Initially, digital mucous cyst or glomus tumor was suspected. Histopathology of the nail matrix showed proliferation of round cell having
abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm, suggesting GCT (Fig. 2E). The tumor cells were positive for S-100 (Fig. 2F). The tumor was removed
by excision. A 52-year-old female had a pea-sized slightly brownish palpable firm nodule on the right thigh for several months (Fig. 1D).
Clinically, dermatofibroma or calcinosis cutis was considered as differential diagnosis. Punch biopsy revealed sheets and clusters of large
cells with abundant granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and small-to-medium sized central round-to-oval nuclei, consistent with GCT (Fig. 2G).
Immunohistochemical staining was positive with S-100 in tumor cells (Fig. 2H). The remaining tumor was excised without involvement of
resection margin. Two non-tender nodules, each 3×1.5 cm and 1×1 cm sized, had been on the right labium majora of a 56-year-old female
patient for 4 years (Fig. 1E). She had a history of total laparoscopic hysterectomy due to uterine leiomyoma 6 years ago. Histopathologic
evaluation showed a circumscribed tumor, composed of large polygonal cells with abundant granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and uniform-looking
round to oval nuclei, forming sheets and nests irregularly infiltrating between collagen bundles, consistent with granular cell tumor (Fig.
2I). Both tumors were removed by Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS) and free resection margin was confirmed by frozen section. The cells were
positive for S-100 (Fig. 2J) and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain. GCTs present as asymptomatic small firm skin colored nodules, but
pruritus and pain might occasionally be present.3 As GCTs are clinically nonspecific, distinctive histologic findings are essential for
diagnosis. GCTs are composed of loosely infiltrating sheets of characteristic large pale polyhedral cells with abundant fine or coarsely
granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and a centrally situated pale nucleus.4 Immunohistochemically, GCTs stain positive for S100 protein, and
neuron specific enolase, and the granules typically stain with PAS.5 Although most GCTs are considered benign, 1-7% of malignant cases and
association with regional or distant metastasis, and multiple organ involvement have been reported.67 Rapid progression, larger size (>4
mm), adjacent tissue invasion, ulceration of the overlying epidermis, cytologic atypia, nuclear pleomorphism, mitotic activity, and necrosis
point towards the malignant potential.8 The histological criteria for malignancy are necrosis, spindling, vesicular nuclei with large
nucleoli, increased mitotic activity (i.e., more than 2 mitoses per 10 high-power fields at ×200 magnification), high nuclear to cytoplasmic
ratio and pleomorphism. Neoplasms that meet three or more of these criteria are considered histologically malignant.9 GCTs preferentially
occur on the head and neck region, particularly the tongue and oral cavity (30-50%), the areas with a high density of peripheral nerves.18
Vulvar GCTs are uncommon and have been reported in 5-16% cases.10 The clinical differential diagnoses include fibroma, lipoma, and
hidradenoma. Histopathologically, GCTs may be difficult to distinguish from granular cell variants of variable tumors, such as leiomyoma,
dermatofibrosarcoma, and angiosarcoma if examined with routine light microscopy alone. Immunohistochemistry helps as GCTs stain negative for
desmin, cytokeratins, epithelial membrane antigen and glial fibrillary acidic protein.4 GCTs on the extremities, including palm, thigh, and
digits, are even rarer, and a GCT involving fingernail matrix, as seen in our case 3, has never been reported in English literature.
Complete surgical excision is the treatment of choice and, if resection margins are involved, wider local excision may be recommended to
decrease the risk of recurrence.11 Some GCTs on extremities might have a far greater tissue depth than clinically suspected, and wider and
deeper excision should be considered.2 Our cases 1-4 on extremities were not invading deeper tissue, such as muscle or bone, and simple
local excision could successfully remove the entire tumors. For cases with atypical features or malignant potential, wide excision and/or
regional lymph node dissection is recommended.12 MMSs are considered when GCTs are malignant or are located in an anatomical region with
limited tissue to spare. In case 5, extensive involvement of right labium majora with 2 large nodules made it difficult to spare enough
tissue, and MMS was performed. Reflecting reported female preponderance, all our 5 cases were present in female patients. These cases were
located on the anatomic locations not commonly known as predilection sites for GCTs. Because of clinical morphology and the anatomical
location, initial clinical differential diagnosis included dermatofibroma, schwannoma for lesions on extremities, and benign cystic lesions
for vulvar tumor, but GCTs were not initially considered. These cases emphasize that GCTs not involving oral cavity or tongue are more
prevalent than expected, and the diagnosis should be confirmed by histopathology, even when the tumors are clinically suspicious of other
tumors. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest.
