Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) has been used routinely in the diagnosis and follow-up of cardiac cases. Left atrial dissection
(LAd), an exceedingly rare complication of cardiac surgery, is most commonly associated with mitral valve surgery. A case of LAd is
presented, and the pathology was accurately defined and immediately diagnosed using intraoperative TEE. This case highlights the importance
of prompt diagnosis of LAd using intraoperative TEE, and a second cardiac surgery was avoided. Left atrial dissection (LAd) is an
exceedingly rare complication of mitral valve surgery. To the best of our knowledge, it has not heretofore been reported after mitral valve
surgery. The most common cause is mitral annular disruption that extends into the left atrial free wall and then into a low-pressure chamber
the left atrium (LA)—via fistulation. We report the development and successful management of an Lad that followed mitral valve replacement
with the help of TEE and thus avoiding second surgery. A 55-year-old man presented with rheumatic heart disease, severe mitral
regurgitation, moderate pulmonary arterial hypertension, and good biventricular function. He was scheduled for mitral valve replacement
(MVR). After applying standard monitors and preoxygenation, general anesthesia was induced with 2 mg of midazolam, 50 mg of propofol, 200 μg
of fentanyl, 60 mg of lidocaine, and 8 mg of vecuronium. Anesthesia was maintained with oxygen: Air, 1% isoflurane, and intermittent doses
of fentanyl. The trachea was intubated with an 8.5-mm single-lumen tracheal tube. A right femoral arterial catheter was placed for
continuous blood pressure monitoring. MVR with 29 mm St. Jude mechanical prosthetic valve with posterior mitral leaflet preservation was
performed through transseptal approach on conventional cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and cold blood cardioplegia. The patient was weaned off
CPB with the optimal inotropic support of 5 μg/kg/min of dopamine and 5 μg/kg/min dobutamine. But, the pressures were on borderline around
80/38 mmHg, and right ventricle appears to be distending with poor myocardial contractions. So, we decided to put transesophageal
echocardiography (TEE) probe to see for any abnormality. To our surprise, we saw a circular hypoechoic mass in the left atrial (LA) free
wall encroaching onto the mitral valve [Figure 1]. This finding was discussed with the surgeon, who decided to re-explore the LA. LA
atriotomy was reopened, the mitral valve appeared to be well seated, and there was no evidence of dissection. Only the LA free wall appeared
to have subendocardial blood collection. There were no continuities between the cavity and the LA, left ventricle, posterior pericardial
space. Marsupialization of the cavity is done and opened it to the LA cavity [Figure 2]. Midesophageal four-chambered view showing
postmitral valve replacement left atrial free wall dissection (an echolucent area from the mitral annular area to the left atrial free wall,
creating a new chamber without communications into the true left atrium) Transesophageal echocardiography images and corresponding surgical
operating images showing left atrial dissection and its marsupialization and opening into left atrial cavity The patient was then weaned
from CPB for the 2nd time with inotropic support of 0.375 μg/kg/min of milrinone, 5 μg/kg/min of dopamine, 5 μg/kg/min dobutamine, and 0.05
μg/kg/min of nor epinephrine. The post-bypass TEE examination showed that LA dissection (LAd) wall appeared to be incised in the middle and
drained out the blood. The patient's postoperative course was complicated by intermittent periods of desaturation which required bi-level
airway pressure ventilation with which he showed improvement in oxygenation. The patient was discharged from the hospital 15 days after
surgery. LAd is a rare complication of cardiac surgery. It has been defined as a false, blood-filled cavity, or lumen from the mitral
annular area to the left atrial free wall or interatrial septum, creating a new chamber with or without communications into the true left
atrium. The incidence has been reported to be 0.16% to as high as 0.84% of patients after MVR. Severe calcification of the mitral annulus
may be contributory. Besides from mitral procedures, aortic valve replacement due to disruption of the noncoronary annulus in the region of
aortic/mitral valve continuity, coronary artery bypass grafting, left ventricular aneurysmectomy, pulmonary vein cannulation, and cardiac
mass excision, maze procedure have been associated with LAd. Partial atrioventricular (AV) separation and tissue fragility are the probable
pathogenesis of LAd associated with mitral valve procedures, although nonmitral cardiac surgeries quite remote from the AV junction can
cause a LAd because of the creation of a small entry tear in the left atrial endocardium. The noncardiac surgical etiologies include
myocardial infarction, percutaneous coronary intervention, radiofrequency ablation (RFA), and blunt cardiac trauma. The time of presentation
has been reported to range from 1-day to 20 years. The dissection forms a large cavity causing obliteration of the LA cavity and resultant
hemodynamic compromise, which almost always requires immediate surgical intervention. Almost all of the reported LAd cases have continuity
between the dissected cavity and the left ventricle which is one of the reasons that LAd is closely associated with left ventricular rupture
and may represent a form of type I left ventricular rupture (Treasure's classification). In the present case, however, there was no
continuity between the false cavity and the heart chambers. To the best of our knowledge, such a presentation of LAd has not been published
previously. The mechanisms include: (1) Excessive traction on the sutures in the posterior annulus resulting in tearing through tissues and
disruption, (2) debridement of a very calcified valve, (3) oversizing of the prosthesis, and (4) inadequate reversal of anticoagulation may
exacerbate the dissection. The close proximity of the circumflex artery and coronary sinus to the posterior wall of the left atrium, AV
groove and mitral annulus is another important factor for the development of Lad during coronary artery bypass grafting surgeries. Although
there are no definitive diagnostic criteria, the TEE findings can be vital, which include: (1) A gap from the mitral annular area to the LA
wall or atrial septum, (2) the false chamber appears as an echolucent area causing or not causing partial obliteration of the atrial cavity,
(3) mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, (4) mitral valve periprosthetic leak, and (5) pulmonary venous obstruction. In this case, the
patient developed LAd at the time of surgery, and TEE provided an immediate diagnosis. After discussing the findings with the surgeon, he
made a prompt decision to re-explore and repaired the dissection based on the intraoperative TEE findings; the patient avoided a second
operation. In summary, the authors think that TEE is the best technique for the diagnosis of LAd based on published studies. The use of
intraoperative TEE can provide an earlier diagnosis that can lead to earlier intervention and the avoidance of a second cardiac operation.
Interestingly, this complication has also been reported after percutaneous mitral balloon valvuloplasty for mitral valve stenosis. Nil.
There are no conflicts of interest.
