Malignant syphilis or lues maligna is a severe form of secondary syphilis that was commonly reported in the pre-antibiotic era, and has now
reemerged with the advent of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) epidemic. However, the characteristic histopathological findings of
malignant syphilis remain controversial. The aim of this case report was to clarify the clinical and histopathological findings of HIV-
positive malignant secondary syphilis. A Japanese man in his forties complained of fever, skin lesions, headache, and myalgia without
lymphadenopathy during the previous 4 weeks. The skin lesions manifested as erythematous, nonhealing, ulcerated papules scattered on his
trunk, extremities, palm, and face. Although the skin lesions were suspected to be cutaneous T-cell lymphomas on histological analyses, they
lacked T-cell receptor Jγ rearrangement; moreover, immunohistochemical analyses confirmed the presence of spirochetes. The patient was
administered antibiotics and anti-retroviral therapy, which dramatically improved the symptoms. On the basis of these observations of the
skin lesions, we finally diagnosed the patient with HIV-associated secondary syphilis that mimicked cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. The patient’s
systemic CD4+ lymphocyte count was very low, and the infiltrate was almost exclusively composed of CD8+ atypical lymphocytes; therefore, the
condition was easily misdiagnosed as cutaneous lymphoma. Although the abundance of plasma cells is a good indicator of malignant syphilis on
skin histological analyses, in some cases, the plasma cell count may be very low. Therefore, a diagnosis of malignant secondary syphilis
should be considered before making a diagnosis of primary cutaneous peripheral T-cell lymphoma or lymphoma associated with HIV infection.
Lues maligna, also known as malignant secondary syphilis or ulceronodular syphilis, is an aggressive and lethal form of secondary syphilis.
Although it was previously eradicated in developed countries with the introduction of antibiotics, it has reemerged recently . The disease
manifests as multiple skin lesions on the face and extremities following a short incubation period; these lesions are characterized by a
nonhealing central ulcer with peripheral extension and a thick, crusty covering. The palms and soles are often affected, and fever, myalgia,
and headache commonly occur. Compatible gross and microscopic morphology, a high antibody titer on serologic tests for syphilis, Jarisch-
Herxheimer reaction following treatment, and dramatic response to antibiotic therapy are classical criteria used for diagnosing malignant
secondary syphilis [1, 3]. Since the 1900s, co-infection with malignant secondary syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has been
more frequently reported; with HIV infection and lues maligna, the outcomes are even poorer than previously reported with lues maligna alone
in the pre-HIV period . There has been a recent increase in the number of syphilis and HIV co-infection cases, and estimates indicate that
16 % of all patients with syphilis and 28 % of male patients with syphilis in the United States are HIV positive . In a Japanese clinical
study conducted from 1986 to 2000, 40.3 % of HIV-1-positive patients also tested positive for rapid plasma reagin (RPR) . The combination of
syphilis and HIV is particularly dangerous because eroded secondary syphilids increase the risk of HIV infection, and HIV can alter the
natural history of syphilis . A new syphilis infection increases the viral load of HIV and decreases CD4+ cell counts in HIV-infected
patients . Potentially because of B-cell dysregulation, the RPR test tends to be masked by the prozone phenomenon, especially in patients
with HIV . Malignant secondary syphilis and central nervous system syphilis are both lethal conditions. Therefore, it has been suggested
that all HIV-positive syphilis patients should be treated with a penicillin-based regimen that is adequate for the treatment for
neurosyphilis . Skin lesions mimicking lymphoma have been reported in a simple infection of either syphilis or HIV. The simple syphilis,
particularly in secondary syphilis, induces generalized lymphadenopathy, and lymphocyte-dominant skin infiltration admixed with neutrophils,
histiocytes, and plasma cells, which can easily be interpreted as lymphoma cutis by pathologists . The abundance of neutrophils seen in
these malignant syphilis cases was also observed in the present case [11, 12]. In contrast, lymphoid proliferative lesions in a simple HIV
infection that are characterized by polyclonal CD8+ lymphocytes that improve with only antiretroviral therapy (ART) have also been reported
and called lymphomas associated with HIV infection, diffuse infiltrative lymphocytosis syndrome, and CD8+ pseudolymphoma . In syphilis and
HIV co-infection, skin lesions have been reported as atypical cutaneous lymphoproliferative disorders in patients with HIV . Tosca et al.
reported that lymphocytes can be of both the CD4 and CD8 types, whereas Muche et al. reported that 85 % of the skin-infiltrating lymphocytes
in HIV patients were CD8+ T-cells . However, the histopathological findings remain controversial. Recently, we encountered a case of HIV-
positive malignant secondary syphilis that histologically mimicked cutaneous peripheral T-cell lymphoma. Here, we report the clinical and
pathological manifestation of the case and describe the correlation with the 4th edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) tumor
classification . A married Japanese man in his forties presented with fever and 1- to 5-cm, well-demarcated, round-to-oval erythematous
pruritic skin macules on his trunk and upper extremities (Fig. 1a). He complained of severe headache and arthralgia and reported low-grade
fever, fatigue, and weight loss during the previous 4 weeks. Superficial lymphadenopathy was unclear.Fig. 1Clinicopathological findings. a.
Skin lesions before treatment. These 1–5-cm erythematous lesions were scattered on the trunk. Lesions larger than the size of a walnut were
ulcerated and crusty. Palmer and planter lesions were also present. b. Nodular infiltration of the cells from the epidermis to the upper
subcutaneous. c. Epidermotropism of atypical lymphoid cells. d. In the dermis, there is severe inflammation around the venules. Atypical
lymphocytes, multinucleated leukocytes, and epithelioid histiocytes are present, but sparse plasma cells. e. Immunohistochemical staining
for CD8. Lymphocytes were exclusively immunoreactive for CD8. Atypical lymphocytes with nuclear twisting and indentation are also present
(arrows). f. In the bone marrow clot, a number of CD8+ lymphocytes are infiltrating, as indicated by immunohistochemistry. g. Atypical
lymphocytes and small lymphocytes are seen in the bone marrow smear, suggestive of non-neoplastic cells (arrowheads). h. Treponema pallidum
is mainly distributed in the dermis, especially in the perivascular space with histiocytes. Immunohistochemical staining for Treponema
pallidum Clinicopathological findings. a. Skin lesions before treatment. These 1–5-cm erythematous lesions were scattered on the trunk.
Lesions larger than the size of a walnut were ulcerated and crusty. Palmer and planter lesions were also present. b. Nodular infiltration of
the cells from the epidermis to the upper subcutaneous. c. Epidermotropism of atypical lymphoid cells. d. In the dermis, there is severe
inflammation around the venules. Atypical lymphocytes, multinucleated leukocytes, and epithelioid histiocytes are present, but sparse plasma
cells. e. Immunohistochemical staining for CD8. Lymphocytes were exclusively immunoreactive for CD8. Atypical lymphocytes with nuclear
twisting and indentation are also present (arrows). f. In the bone marrow clot, a number of CD8+ lymphocytes are infiltrating, as indicated
by immunohistochemistry. g. Atypical lymphocytes and small lymphocytes are seen in the bone marrow smear, suggestive of non-neoplastic cells
(arrowheads). h. Treponema pallidum is mainly distributed in the dermis, especially in the perivascular space with histiocytes.
Immunohistochemical staining for Treponema pallidum He had the following characteristics at admission: height, 171 cm; weight, 49 kg; blood
pressure, 98/63 mmHg; pulse, 90 beats/min; and body temperature, 38.0 °C. His blood examination showed RPR positivity, antibody 5.4 R.U,
card method × 4, and Treponema pallidum (TP) antigen × 2713.6 U. Anticardiolipin and antinuclear antibody tests were negative. The following
results were also obtained: white blood cells, 7470/μL (neutrophils, 83.0 %; lymphocytes, 6.5 %; monocytes, 3.0 %; eosinophils, 3.5 %;
basophils, 0.5 %; atypical lymphocytes, 2.5 %; abnormal lymphocytes, 0.0 %; toxic granule +; and hypersegmentation +); red blood cells,
354 × 104/μL; hemoglobin, 10.4 g/dL; hematocrit, 31.7 %; mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, 32.8 %; mean corpuscular hemoglobin,
29.4 pg; mean corpuscular volume, 89.5 fL; prothrombin time, 13.8 s, 78 %; prothrombin time-international normalized ratio, 1.12; activated
partial thromboplastin time, 41.3 s; fibrinogen, 439 mg/dL; gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, 80 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 180 U/L; total
cholesterol, 22 mg/dL; TP, 6.9 g/dL; immunoglobulin (Ig) G, 1879 mg/dL; IgA, 264 mg/dL; IgM, 186 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 8 mg/dL;
creatinine, 0.63 mg/dL; C-reactive protein, 5.99 mg/dL; and soluble IL-2 receptor (sIL2R), 1585 U/mL. Based on skin biopsy, peripheral
T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS) was suspected (see histological findings). For this pathological diagnosis,
sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, itraconazole, and prednisolone were prescribed. At admission, syphilis and HIV co-infection was detected on
the basis of positivity for the HIV antibody, HIV-RNA of 1.1 × 105 copies/mL, and CD4+ T-cell count of 110/μL. Because he was considered a
high-risk AIDS patient, ART consisting of emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate plus efavirenz and methyl prednisolone was initiated.
Electron beam irradiation and narrowband ultraviolet B therapy were also performed. Despite partial remission of the skin lesions fever
following the therapy, high fever recurred 1.5 months later, and the eruptions had generally spread, producing large amounts of exudate.
Persistent fever due to indwelling catheter infection was suspected, for which cefepime to amoxicillin treatment was initiated. The fever
reduced significantly, and the eruptions started to disappear. He was discharged from the hospital without undergoing chemotherapy. During
the 1-year follow-up at the clinic, he did not experience any symptoms. On skin biopsy, diffuse infiltration of atypical lymphoid cells was
observed mainly in the upper to mid dermis (Fig. 1b). Some epidermotropism of the atypical lymphoid cells was present (Fig. 1c). The
atypical lymphocytes were denser around the skin appendages, and the dermal vessels showed venulitis with extravasation of red blood cells.
There were abundant neutrophils, histiocytes, a small number of plasma cells, and eosinophils (Fig. 1d). Nuclear dust was not prominent.
Atypical lymphoid cells showed positive immunohistochemical staining for CD3, 1CD7, CD8 (Fig. 1e), granzyme B, and perforin. The Ki-67
labeling index was high. Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA was positive only in a few cells. Immunoreactivity for CD4, CD20, CD30, and CD56
were negative. In the 4th edition of the WHO classification for tumors, the differential diagnoses in skin lesions with HIV-positive, CD8+
CD30-T-cell proliferation are as follows: primary cutaneous peripheral T-cell lymphoma (primary cutaneous gamma delta T-cell lymphoma or
primary cutaneous CD8-positive aggressive epidermotropic T-cell lymphoma), subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma, mycosis fungoides
(rare CD8 subtype), lymphomatoid papulosis (rare CD8 subtype), and lymphoma associated with HIV infection (rare manifestation). The present
lesion lacked T-cell receptor (TCR) rearrangement, massive epidermotropism, and panniculitis. Therefore, we initially misdiagnosed the
patient with cutaneous PTCL-NOS with a cytotoxic phenotype. For staging, CD8+ atypical lymphoid cell infiltration (Fig. 1f) and sparse CD4+
cells in the bone marrow clot suggested involvement of CD8+ T-cell lymphoma. Although very few abnormal lymphocytes were present in the bone
marrow smear (Fig. 1g), up to 10 % of all nuclear cells were classified as atypical lymphocytes, which we assumed to be a reactive change.
Therefore, re-evaluation of the skin lesions was performed. The TCR rearrangement of both Jγ and CTβ was polyclonal. The immunohistochemical
staining for Treponema was re-examined, using the same formalin-fixed paraffin block. Infiltration of numerous spirochetes predominantly in
the dermis was observed (Fig. 1h). On the basis of these data and the clinical course, we finally concluded that the skin lesions were not
neoplastic and were secondary syphilids that mimicked T-cell lymphoma in an HIV-positive host. Ordinary secondary syphilis presents various
skin manifestations. However, approximately 80 % of patients show superficial lichenoid/psoriasiform inflammation with a plasma cell-,
lymphocyte-, and histiocyte-dominant pattern. Treponema pallidum distribution is also epitheliotropic . In contrast, inflammatory cells are
deeper and more complicated in malignant secondary syphilis. Lues maligna is the more common name for malignant secondary syphilis in
dermatology and is characterized by dermal plasma cells admixed with lymphocytes, histiocytes, and neutrophils—neutrophilic venulitis is
described as a pattern of lues maligna—but spirochetes are infrequently found [19, 20]. An appropriate Treponema immunohistochemical
staining technique might be needed for diagnosis. In our case, ART was not effective but a combination of ART and antibiotics such as
penicillin-G improved the symptoms, while RPR antibody 5.4 R.U tested negative. Venereal Disease Research Laboratory/Rapid Plasma Reagin
(VDRL/RPR) titers have been reported to range between 1:16 and 1:4096 in HIV-negative classical malignant syphilis . In any event, an HIV-
positive patient’s sample requires diluted re-examination for prozone phenomenon. RPR was originally designed as a method for detecting
autoantibodies, and its titer reflects tissue inflammation level caused by Treponema pallidum infection. Therefore, in HIV-positive cases,
immunodeficiency may lead to low titer-positive and prolonged negative conversion. We also think that systemic CD4+ lymphocytopenia caused
by a severe HIV infection and some hypercytokinemia caused by lues maligna might play a significant role on the appearance of numerous CD8+
atypical lymphocytes and fewer plasma cells (Table 1).Table 1Number of CD4+ cells, results of the rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test for
Treponema pallidum, and human immunodeficiency virus RNA PSL prednisolone, EB electron beam, UV narrowband ultraviolet B, AMPC amoxicillin,
CFPM cefepime, ART antiretroviral therapy, TDF/FTC+EFV emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate plus efavirenz, ND not done, RPR rapid
plasma reagin, HIV human immunodeficiency virus Number of CD4+ cells, results of the rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test for Treponema pallidum,
and human immunodeficiency virus RNA PSL prednisolone, EB electron beam, UV narrowband ultraviolet B, AMPC amoxicillin, CFPM cefepime, ART
antiretroviral therapy, TDF/FTC+EFV emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate plus efavirenz, ND not done, RPR rapid plasma reagin, HIV
human immunodeficiency virus When ulcerated skin lesions are observed in a patient with syphilis and HIV co-infection, a diagnosis of lues
maligna should be considered before diagnosing the patient with cutaneous lymphoma, even if there is an abundance of CD8+ lymphocytes
without plasma cells. Slight neutrophilic venulitis might be an important finding. The diagnosis could be confirmed by the serological
syphilis test (STS) or Treponema pallidum hemagglutination (TPHA) test (both positive), immunohistochemical positivity for Treponema
pallidum, and TCR polyclonality in the skin lesion. Cases of co-infections with malignant syphilis and HIV have been on the rise, and
delayed diagnosis is dangerous not only for the patient but also for public health. The present case demonstrates that pathologists should
be aware of the possibility of lues maligna with HIV, mimicking cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Our hospital Ethics Committee provided ethical approval for the publication of this report. Antiretroviral
therapy Human immunodeficiency virus Immunoglobulin Peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified Rapid plasma reagin Serological
syphilis test Soluble IL-2 receptor T-cell receptor Treponema pallidum Treponema pallidum hemagglutination Venereal Disease Research
Laboratory/Rapid Plasma Reagin World Health Organization Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions YS and YT carried out the immunoassays. KO, UY, MI, SN, SF, and MA provided clinical information. MY, YS, and UY
conceived the study, participated in its design and coordination, and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. We would like to thank Prof. Yutaka Tsutsumi (The 1st Department of Pathology, Fujita Health University School of
Medicine) for Treponema pallidum immunohistochemical staining.
