We present a 37-year-old lady who had liver transplantation for hepatitis B cirrhosis and was on immune suppressive treatment consisting of
mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and tacrolimus. She presented with undue fatigue and recurring pain in both arms. The diagnosis of Takayasu's
arteritis was made, supported by angiographic findings of significant stenosis of the left subclavian and both renal arteries. She was
managed by adjusting the immune suppressive medications and underwent a successful percutaneous transluminal balloon angioplasty (PTBA).
Takayasu's arteritis (TA) is a form of large vessel granulomatous vasculitis that affects the aorta and its major branches (pulseless
disease). TA is a relatively rare disease characterized by chronic inflammatory vasculitic changes of the aorta and its major branches. It
usually affects women under 40 years of age, particularly of Asian descent, and it may present as an acute and/or chronic illness. Fever,
arthralgia, and skin rashes are the common manifestations during the acute phase of the disease. The significant complications that appear
during the chronic phase include limb claudication due to subclavian artery stenosis and systemic hypertension secondary to renal artery
stenosis. The disease can also lead to cerebral, coronary, or mesenteric ischemia with devastating effects. Magnetic resonance angiography
(MRA) and computed tomography (CT) angiography are widely used to diagnose TA; however, the gold standard test is angiography. TA may
precede or appear in patients with existing autoimmune disorders. There have been numerous reports of its association with Crohn's disease,
sarcoidosis, spondyloarthropathies, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The role of autoimmunity in TA, however, is yet to be
determined. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of TA post liver transplantation in the English literature. We present a case
of 38-year-old female patient who underwent liver transplant in July 2001 for decompensated hepatitis B cirrhosis. The patient was followed
up in the Transplant Clinic at Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. She is currently on mycophenolate
mofetil (MMF) 1 g twice daily, prednisolone 5 mg once daily, tacrolimus 1.5 mg twice daily, lamivudine 100 mg once daily, and immunoglobulin
and hepatitis B human Immunoglobuline injection 400 U given intramuscularly (IM) once a month. She was initially treated with cyclosporin,
hepatitis B virus immunoglobulin, and lamivudine to prevent recurrence of hepatitis B virus. Her immunosuppressive treatment was modified by
replacing ciclosporin with tacrolimus, following an episode of acute graft rejection in 2007. MMF was added following the second episode of
rejection that was confirmed histologically in June 2011. Her liver function tests have normalized. She was also diagnosed to have
hypertension in 2008 and was treated with amlodipine 5 mg and enalapril 5 mg. It was later changed to valsartan 160 mg once daily. She
gradually developed pain and claudication in both hands and arms in the last 3 years. She has a history of fatigue and headache, but no
weight loss, fever, or rashes. Cardiovascular evaluation showed loss of radial and brachial pulses in the left upper limb. The lower limb
pulses were normal. Blood pressure was 165/79 mmHg in the left upper limb and 115/60 mmHg in the right upper limb, and there was a bruit
over the right subclavian artery. Abdominal examination showed Mercedes scar with no organomegaly. Respiratory and neurological examinations
were unremarkable. A psychiatric evaluation was also satisfactory. Hematological examination revealed normal complete blood count: WBC,
Haemoglobin, and platelets. Serum electrolytes were normal. Other findings were: Urea 8.2 (2.0–6.7) mmol/l, creatinine 94 (87–108) mmol/l,
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) 301 (7–32) U/l, total bilirubin 7 (2–22) mmol/l, albumin 43 g/l, alkaline phosphatase 104 U/l, alanine
transaminase 52 (2–40) U/l, and FK-506 7.5 (4.0–20) μg/l. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was normal, extractable nuclear antigens was
negative, dsDNA was negative, anti-nuclear antibody was 1/80, and C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 1 mg/l. Echocardiography showed normal
ventricular function, normal aortic arch, normal valves, and no cortication. Chest radiography and ECG were both normal. The patient had
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [Figure 1] which demonstrated smooth narrowing of the short segment of the right subclavian artery by 30%,
where it crosses between the first right rib and the right clavicle. The origin of the proximal left subclavian artery with marked stenosis
of 99% was not visualized. In addition, there was bilateral renal artery stenosis of approximately 50% on the right side [Figure 2], but was
not significant on the left side. The patient was diagnosed to have TA based on American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria 1990, since
she met all the criteria. She received prednisolone 60 mg/day (increased from 10 mg/day), which was gradually tapered after 1 month. The
dosage of cellcept was doubled to 1 g twice daily and the tacrolimus level was titerated to maintain a trough level of 5 ng/ml. MRA showing
99% stenosis of the left subclavian artery and 30% stenosis on the right side (arrows) Right renal artery with 50% stenosis She underwent
balloon angioplasty for the left subclavian artery, which resulted in excellent recanalization [Figure 3]. She also underwent balloon
angioplasty of the right renal artery, which also resulted in good recanalization [Figure 4]. Angiography showing left subclavian
recanalization Right renal artery post-ballooning with good response In addition to the angiographic recanalization of the stenotic lesions,
the steroid dose was increased to 60 mg daily that was tapered after 1 month. TA is a chronic inflammatory disease that affects aorta and
its major branches. The exact etiology is unknown. The diagnosis is made clinically according to the ACR1990 criteria to diagnose TA, which
depends on the presence of at least three criteria of the following six criteria: 1. age of onset less than 40; 2. claudication of
extremities; 3. absence of brachial pulse; 4. blood pressure difference of 10 mmHg between the two arms; 5. bruit over the subclavian
artery; and 6. abnormal angiogram. Our patient showed all these criteria. Autoantibodies against aortic endothelial cells were found to have
a role in its pathogenesis. In another study, TA patients demonstrated CD36 deficiency (CD36d). The human CD36 antigen is a multifunctional
membrane glycoprotein that belongs to the class B scavenger receptor family. It is expressed on monocytes, platelets, and endothelial cells,
and contributes to myocardial fatty acid transport. In patients with CD36d, myocardial I-15-(p-iodophenyl)-3-(R, S)-methyl pentadecanoic
acid (BMIPP) uptake was absent. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) associations have also been identified, of which the frequently reported were
HLA-A10, B5, Bw52, DR2, DR4, B21, and B22. Many of these, however, remain unconfirmed and are variable across different ethnic groups. HLA
typing was not performed in this patient. It is our understanding that it was not required for the diagnosis. Also, there is no evidence
that it has any bearing on the management plan or disease monitoring. TA has been reported in association with other autoimmune disorders
such as Crohn's disease, SLE, sarcoidosis, and spondyloarthropathies, either as the primary disease or secondary to an existing autoimmune
disorder. The diagnosis in our patient was carried out 2 years after the onset of the first symptoms. This is not surprising as the delay in
diagnosing this condition is common with an average latency of 18 months. The immunosuppressive drugs might have masked some of the
symptoms. Our patient had liver transplantation over 10 years ago and was maintained on cyclosporin for 6 years after which it was replaced
with tacrolimus following an episode of acute rejection. Both drugs have been used to treat TA and have shown good results, and so it is
plausible to believe that her symptoms and the arteritis activity were partially controlled with this treatment. The counter argument is
that TA may manifest itself in patients who are well covered with immune suppressive treatment. The severe form of the disease can be
refractory to high doses of corticosteroids and conventional immune suppressive medications such as azathioprine, methotrexate, and
cyclophosphamide. Tacrolimus was reported in early animal studies, particularly in dogs, to induce arteritis. However, we are not aware of
similar reports in humans, except for only report on a single case of cerebral vasculitis associated with neurotoxicity in a liver
transplant patient treated with tacrolimus. This patient was transplanted for hepatitis B cirrhosis, a known association with arteritis such
as polyarteritis nodosa, however, there areno reports of any link between hepatitis B and TA disease. The fact that this patient remained
negative for both HbsAg and HBV-DNA throughout the post-transplantation period further rules out the association of these two conditions.
The difficulty in managing TA patients lies in the setting of the liver transplantation, the choice of treatment, and absence of reliable
disease activity markers. Inflammatory markers like ESR and CRP may be normal even when the disease is very active. They have 72%
sensitivity and 56% specificity. Other tests used to monitor TA activity are imaging modalities like digital subtracting angiography (DSA)
and computed tomography angiography (CTA). These tests are used in screening, diagnosis, and in interventional treatment. MRI may also help
to visualize the vessel wall stenosis and thickening and using T2 imaging, active inflammation of the vessel wall manifested by wall edema
can be visualized. Ultrasonography (US) is another test that is cheap and convenient in diagnosing any structural wall abnormalities, but
will not be able to detect disease activity. Positron emission tomography with radiolabeled glucose (FDG-PET) can highlight the region of
inflammation with a sensitivity of 92% and specificity of 100%. It is more sensitive than MRI in detecting vascular involvement in early TA
and it is helpful in monitoring response to treatment. It is however expensive and not widely available. Corticosteroids remain the mainstay
of medical treatment and appear to be effective in 20–75% of patients. Immune suppressive agents that include methotrexate,
cyclophosphamide, and azathioprine may be effective. MMF has recently been introduced to treat TA. In a recent study, MMF was found to be a
safe and effective steroid-sparing agent in treating patients with TA. The main treatment for TA is immune suppression, which is parallel to
the treatment of patients post liver transplantation. The most widely used immune suppressives for TA such as steroids or mycophenolates are
widely used post liver transplantation, and therefore, there is no concern with regard to graft rejection or hepatotoxicity. Selection of a
therapeutic agent depends largely on the side effect profile, as the data remains limited on the treatment of choice of TA. Biological
treatment with agents such as anti-tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF), etanercept, and infliximab had been tried in refractory TA, and the
response was variable. Anti-IL-6 has also been used in a few cases that were resistant to conventional immunosuppressant therapy, and anti-
TNF-α and was found to be effective. Surgical vascular reconstruction of the involved vessels used to be carried out in the past in the form
of bypassing a stenotic segment, graft anastomosis, or end arterectomy. Recently, percutaneous transluminal angioplasty has emerged as the
treatment of choice for stenotic lesions. In conclusion, this is the first report of TA post liver transplantation in the English
literature. The immunosuppressive drugs might have reduced severity of the disease, but are not effective in preventing it. The standard
measures for early diagnosis of this condition and other vasculitic disorders are not adequate in immune suppressed patients and a higher
index of suspicion is needed. Source of Support: None of the authors received any fund for producing this article Conflict of Interest: No
one has any commercial associations that might cause a conflict of interest in relation to the submitted article.
