Dear Editor, Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy, and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome is a rare multisystem
disorder of obscure etiology that is associated with plasma cell dyscrasia . Optic disc edema (ODE) has been reported to be a common ocular
manifestation of POEMS syndrome . Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has been regarded to have an important role in the
pathophysiology of POEMS syndrome. We present a case of a young female patient presenting with bilateral optic nerve head edema after being
diagnosed with POEMS syndrome, who was successfully treated with repeated intravitreal bevacizumab injections. The study protocol was
approved by the Institutional Review Board of Yonsei University Severance Hospital and followed the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. A
34-year-old female patient presented with progressive narrowing of her visual field (VF). She had been diagnosed with POEMS syndrome 3
months previously at the department of hemato-oncology and had received palliative radiotherapy of 5,000 cGy to her right iliac crest, in
which a plasmacytoma was located. She was also prescribed thalidomide 100 mg/day orally. According to her medical records, she had bilateral
ODE at the time of diagnosis. At that time, lumbar puncture had revealed a slightly increased intracranial pressure of 16.18 mmHg. Her best-
corrected visual acuity and intraocular pressure were 20 / 25 and 18 mmHg, respectively. There were no abnormal findings in either eye, with
the exception of severe bilateral ODE. Automated perimetry showed bilateral enlarged blind spots and VF constriction. A fluorescein
angiogram revealed early, well delineated hyperfluorescence in both optic discs, compatible with ODE (Fig. 1A-1H). Indocyanine green
angiography revealed no abnormalities of choroidal perfusion. Although her central vision was largely unaffected, the patient complained of
progressively enlarging VF defects, which was confirmed by automated perimetry. The worsening VF defects coupled with the presence of ODE
following the completion of radiotherapy warranted further intervention. Bilateral intravitreal bevacizumab injections were performed after
informed consent had been obtained. Quantification of the intravitreal VEGF at the time of injection was within the established normal range
(<30 pg/mL); however, the systemic VEGF level was elevated at 166.0 pg/mL (normal, 0 to 38.3 pg/mL). One week after the intravitreal
injection of bevacizumab, repeat fluorescein angiogram and fundus photography revealed bilateral regression of the ODE accompanied by
improvement in the VF. Approximately 50 days later, the patient complained of recurring VF defects, and increasing ODE was observed in both
eyes. Repeat bilateral injections were administered with improvement in both the symptoms and ODE (Fig. 1I-1L). At follow-up 11 months after
the injections, the patient had 20 / 20 vision with complete regression of the ODE, likely due to systemic improvement. The presence of ODE
in POEMS syndrome has been well documented . However, its etiology remains a matter of controversy. Increased systemic VEGF , increased
intracranial pressure , nerve infiltration , and vascular hyperpermeability have been suggested as possible causes. The patient presented
here showed an initial improvement in symptomatic ODE after intravitreal bevacizumab injection; however, the ODE redeveloped approximately
50 days later. This timeline coincides with the known duration of anti-VEGF antibody. The successful management of ODE with anti-VEGF
therapy before systemic improvement seems to imply that VEGF is an important component in the pathophysiology of ODE in POEMS syndrome. The
lack of increase in VEGF titer from vitreous samples in our case coincides with data from previous report . This suggests that ocular
manifestations, such as ODE, are related to elevated level of systemic VEGF rather than intraocular VEGF. Systemic VEGF might alter optic
nerve head vascular permeability via the choroidal blood flow, which is relatively free to communicate with the systemic circulation. We
report a case of POEMS syndrome that was treated with intravitreal bevacizumab injection. Our findings suggest that the cause of ODE in
POEMS syndrome might be associated with VEGF. A relationship between the cause of ODE in POEMS syndrome and systemic VEGF should be further
investigated. Conflict of Interest: No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
