Differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) is relatively rare and can metastasize to both the lungs and bones. The great majority of bone
metastases occur in red marrow regions where blood flow is high. Only one patient has been described with direct DTC metastasis to the
subchondral bone of the femoral head. The patient was a 68-year-old Japanese female who had presented with left hip joint pain at age
63 years. At age 51 years, she had been diagnosed with DTC and underwent partial excision. X-rays showed partial femoral head collapse,
suggesting osteoarthritis or idiopathic necrosis of the left femoral head. Three years later, a 131 I whole-body scan showed accumulation in
the left femoral head, resulting in a diagnosis of DTC metastasis to the left femoral head. Bipolar hip arthroplasty was performed.
Examination of the excised femoral head resulted in a final diagnosis of metastasis of follicular thyroid cancer, which was limited
histopathologically to the subchondral bone of the femoral head. Tumor metastasis to the subchondral bone of the femoral head is exceedingly
rare. Overall survival of patients with bone metastasis is improved by complete resection. Differential diagnosis of patients with a
previous history of DTC who present with femoral head collapse should include bone metastasis of DTC. Thyroid cancer is a relatively rare
disease, accounting for approximately 1 % of all malignant neoplasms, about 0.5 % in men and 1.5 % in women . Various types of thyroid
cancer have been identified, including differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC), Hürthle-cell cancer, undifferentiated carcinoma and medullary
carcinoma. About 90 % of thyroid cancers are DTC, including both papillary (70–75 %), and follicular (15–20 %) cancers. Papillary DTC is
characterized by indolence and localized spread, but may metastasize to the lungs and bones. Follicular cancer is known to preferentially
metastasize to the lungs and bones . Bone metastases have been reported in 2.3–12.7 % of patients with DTC . Most bone metastases occur in
areas of high blood flow, including the red marrow regions of the axial skeleton, including the vertebrae (42–52 %), femur (9–20 %), skull
(2–16 %) and pelvis (5–13 %) [4, 5]. Blood for the femoral head is supplied by branches of the profunda femoris artery, e.g. the lateral and
medial circumflex femoral arteries. Furthermore, there is little collateral circulation, resulting in ischemic necrosis. Bone metastasis
were reported difficult to distinguish from osteonecrosis or arthritis on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and fluorine-18
fluorodeoxyglucose whole-body positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) . The most common site of femur metastasis in various cancers,
including thyroid cancer, is the femoral neck (50 %), Followed by the subtrochanteric (30 %) and intertrochanteric (20 %) regions [7, 8]. To
date, no patient with breast cancer has shown a single metastasis to the femoral head alone; rather, patients with femoral head metastasis
had more than five metastasic lesions each . Thyroid cancer metastasis to the subchondral bone of the femoral head is exceedingly rare, with
only one previous patient described . This report describes a patient with a thyroid cancer metastasis to the subchondral bone of the
femoral head. The patient was a 68-year-old Japanese female who had presented with left hip joint pain at age 63 years. At age 51 years, she
had been diagnosed with thyroid cancer and underwent partial excision, with the pathological diagnosis being a follicular DTC. At age
62 years, she was diagnosed with cancer in the right kidney, which was totally excised. At her first visit for hip pain, physical
examination of the hip and blood tests showed no abnormal findings. However, X-rays (Fig. 1a) and computed tomography (CT) (Fig. 1b) showed
partial femoral head collapse. On MRI, the focal lesion of the femoral head had a band-like shape, with low intensity on T1WI and high
intensity on STIR, (Fig. 1c, d). Bone scans showed no accumulation of radioactivity, except for the femoral head (Fig. 2). The patient was
differentially diagnosed with osteoarthritis of the hip or idiopathic necrosis of the femoral head. Because she had slight pain in the hip
joint, she was followed up by X-rays of her hip joint. Three years after the initial consultation, a bone metastasis was observed in her
right rib and was excised. The excised tumor was diagnosed histopathologically as a metastasis of follicular thyroid cancer. Subsequently,
X-rays (Fig. 3a) and MRI (Fig. 3b) showed that the lesion and the area of collapse had expanded, with a 131 I whole-body scan showing
accumulation of radioactivity in the left femoral head (Fig. 3c). These findings suggested that the lesion in the femoral head was a
metastasis of thyroid cancer. The patient underwent bipolar hip arthroplasty (BHA) (Fig. 4a), with the excised femoral head diagnosed as a
metastasis of follicular thyroid cancer. Histopathologic examination showed that the cancer cells were limited to the subchondral bone of
the femoral head (Fig. 4b). The day after surgery, the patient was able to walk with full-weight-bearing. At present, 18 months after BHA,
there has been no evidence of additional metastatic lesions and her Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS) score is 100 %.Fig. 1 a X-ray of
the hip joint showing left partial femoral head collapse. b CT image showed a lesion in the loaded part of the left femoral head. c Coronal
T1 weighted image (T1WI) on MRI, showing low intensity of the left femoral head lesion. d Coronal short tau inversion recovery (STIR) on
MRI, showing partially high intensity of the femoral head lesionFig. 2Bone scan showing that the only metastatic lesion was in the femoral
headFig. 3 a X-ray of the hip joint 3 years after initial consultation, showing that the collapsed area had expanded. b Coronal T1 weighted
MR image showing expanded low intensity of the left femoral head lesion. c 131 I whole-body scan (WBS) showing accumulation of radioactivity
in the left femoral headFig. 4 a X-ray, showing the left hip joint after BHA. b Photograph of the vertically divided left femoral head after
surgery. DTC was observed in the subchondral region of femoral head (arrowhead). There was no cartilage discontinuity a X-ray of the hip
joint showing left partial femoral head collapse. b CT image showed a lesion in the loaded part of the left femoral head. c Coronal T1
weighted image (T1WI) on MRI, showing low intensity of the left femoral head lesion. d Coronal short tau inversion recovery (STIR) on MRI,
showing partially high intensity of the femoral head lesion Bone scan showing that the only metastatic lesion was in the femoral head a
X-ray of the hip joint 3 years after initial consultation, showing that the collapsed area had expanded. b Coronal T1 weighted MR image
showing expanded low intensity of the left femoral head lesion. c 131 I whole-body scan (WBS) showing accumulation of radioactivity in the
left femoral head a X-ray, showing the left hip joint after BHA. b Photograph of the vertically divided left femoral head after surgery. DTC
was observed in the subchondral region of femoral head (arrowhead). There was no cartilage discontinuity DTC is one of the most curable
cancers . DTCs are characterized by a slowly progressive course, and have a 10-year survival rate of 80–95 % . However, the occurrence of
distant metastases reduces the overall 10-year survival rate to 40 % . Previous studies have reported that 25 % of metastases were to the
bone, 49 % to the lung and 15 % to both. Bone metastases have been reported in 2–13 % of patients with DTC, being significantly more
frequent in patients with follicular cancer (7–28 %) than in those with papillary cancer (1.4–7 %) . The patient described here had
follicular cancer. Patients with thyroid cancer and bone metastases have a poor prognosis, with 10-year survival rates ranging from 0–34 % .
Complete resection of bone metastases of DTC has been associated with a significant improvement in survival [3, 17]. Most bone metastases of
DTC occur in regions of high blood flow, including the vertebrae (42-52 %), femur (9–20 %), skull (2–16 %) and pelvis (5–13 %) [4, 5].
Anatomically, bone metastasis to the femoral head is very rare, with direct involvement of the subchondral region reported in only one
previous patient . Diagnosis is therefore very difficult, with these lesions appearing similar on imaging modalities to osteonecrosis and
osteoarthrosis. Bone metastases of thyroid cancer may be accompanied by pain, but often are clinically silent, making them difficult to
detect. Imaging modalities, including whole body bone MRI, CT, bone scan, 131 I whole-body scan (WBS) and FDG-PET, should be performed in
patients with suspected bone metastases of DTC. Whole body MRI provides detailed images of both bone and bone marrow. CT can evaluate the
extent of metastatic lesions and is especially useful for sites that are difficult to evaluate. If whole body MRI or CT detects a bone
metastasis, a directed MRI or CT scan should be employed to specifically define the lesion of interest and aid in the planning of surgery or
radiotherapy or the use of novel modalities to treat destructive osseous metastases. Bone scans with 99mTc diphosphonate or methylene
diphosphonate (MDP) are most frequently used for localization and staging. 131 I-WBS is more specific and sensitive than a bone scan but
only for well differentiated thyroid cancer . These scans have low sensitivity in detecting distant metastases from thyroid cancer and in
localizing bone metastases. In contrast post-treatment 131 I-WBS may be highly sensitive (61–65 %) in detecting osseous lesions, as in the
patient described here. Because 131 I-WBS can detect some, but not all, bone metastases, further testing is needed . For example, FDG-PET
shows preferential tracer uptake by malignant cells with a high turnover rate due to increased glucose metabolism. FDG-PET is useful in
patients with metastatic poorly differentiated thyroid cancer, in those with high thyroglobulin levels and in patients negative on 131 I-WBS
. X-rays and CT scans in the patient described here showed femoral head collapse, whereas MRI showed that the focal lesion of the femoral
head had the shape of a band, with low intensity on T1WI and high intensity on STIR. Furthermore, bone scans showed no other metastatic
lesions. The differential diagnosis included osteoarthritis of the hip and idiopathic necrosis of the femoral head. Three years later, a
metastasis in the right rib was detected, with 131 I-WBS showing the metastasis to the left femoral head. Because the overall survival of
patients with bone metastasis is improved by complete resection, early diagnosis and treatment is important. Bone metastasis of DTC should
be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients with a previous history of DTC and femoral head collapse. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Differentiated thyroid cancer Computed tomography Magnetic resonance imaging
2-deoxy-2-fluoro-D-glucose integrated with computed tomography 131 I whole-body scan Bipolar hip arthroplasty Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. Author’s contributions TS, RT, ST, YM and NM diagnosed the Metastasis of
differentiated thyroid cancer in the subchondral bone of the femoral head. TS, RT, MS, KU and NM operated this patient. TS, RT, ST and TK
were providing valuable advice working on the manuscript. NM, TS, RT, ST and YM wrote the manuscript. MS, KU and TK were proof reading the
manuscript, revising it critically. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. No other persons accept the authors contributed
towards the article. The authors received no funding for the manuscript preparation.
