Pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis (PCH) is an uncommon pulmonary disorder, with variable clinical features depending on which lung
structure is affected, and it is usually linked to pulmonary arterial hypertension. Congenital PCH has been very rarely described and, so
far, the only causative gene identified is EIF2AK4, which encodes for a translation initiation factor. However, not all PCH cases might
carry a mutation in this gene. We report the clinical and cytogenetic characterization of a patient (male, newborn, first child of healthy
non-consanguineous parents) died after three days of life with severe neonatal pulmonary hypertension, due to diffuse capillary
hemangiomatosis diagnosed post mortem. Conventional karyotyping, Microarray-Based Comparative Genomic Hydridization (CGHa) and quantitative
PCR were performed. CGHa revealed a heterozygous chromosome 16q23.3q24.1 interstitial deletion, spanning about 2.6 Mb and involving a FOXF1
gene enhancer. Quantitative PCR showed that the proband’s deletion was de novo. Microsatellite analysis demonstrate that the deletion
occurred in the maternal chromosome 16. FOXF1 loss of function mutation have been so far identified in alveolar capillary dysplasia with
misalignment of pulmonary veins (ACD/MPV), a lung disease different from PCH. Our data suggest the hypothesis that disruption of the FOXF1
gene enhancer could be a genetic determinant of PCH. Moreover, our findings support the idea that FOXF1 is a paternally imprinted gene. The
online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12881-015-0241-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
Pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis (PCH) is a rare disorder that was first reported in 1978, with less than a few hundred nonrelated cases
reported, so far . The PCH frequency within the general population is actually unknown [2, 3]. PCH anatomopathological features are
pulmonary hypertension and excessive neovascularization characterized by capillary-sized blood vessels within the pulmonary interstitial
tissue, vasculature, and airways [4, 5]. Clinically, PCH cases are quite variable; also because, this disease could mimic different lung
diseases, including pulmonary veno-occlusive disease, idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension and atypical interstitial lung disease .
Nowadays, the only genetic cause identified is a mutation in EIF2AK4 gene (Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha kinase 4, in
chromosome 15q15.1), which encodes for a translation factor . However, not all PCH cases might carry a mutation in this gene . We report the
clinical and genetic characterization of a newborn male presenting early severe pulmonary hypertension, due to a post-mortem diagnosis of
PCH. He carried a 2.6 Mb sized 16q23.3q24.1 deletion, as demonstrated by CGHa. He displayed no additional anomalies or malformations, and no
familial occurrence. The patient was the first child of nonrelated healthy parents with a negligible familial history. The patient was a
full term (41 weeks) male infant, born by induced vaginal delivery to a 38-year old mother, whose pregnancy was uneventful. Birth weight,
length and head circumference were 3340 gr, 50.2 cm and 34.0 cm, respectively. Apgar scores were 4-10-10. After birth, since the patient did
not show spontaneous breathing and was hypotonic, he was stimulated and ventilated by ambu (FiO2: 0.4). Because he presented an increased
O2-requirement after one hour of life, he was subjected to oxygenation by FiO2 40 %. Chest radiography showed widespread hypodiafania of the
right hemithorax. Blood tests were negative for infection. Ultrasound revealed a normal brain anatomy, with mild hyperechoic periventricular
left rear. Ultrasonography was compatible with wet lung disease. 21 h after birth, the infant developed a deteriorating respiratory distress
and echocardiography documented a severe pulmonary hypertension in the absence of congenital structural abnormalities. He died at the third
day of life from respiratory distress, pulmonary hypertension, heart failure and an extreme bradycardia. The autopsy demonstrated a lung
parenchyma characterized by marked edema and stasis. Tissue from autoptic lung samples were fixed in 4 % formalin for about 24 h. Fixed
tissue was then paraffin embedded and 4 μm slides were stained with hematoxilin and eosin. Immunohistochemical stains for CD31 (1:200, clone
JC70A, Dako, Denmark), CD34 (1:50, clone QBEND10, Dako, Denmark) and histochemical Masson’s trichrome stain were performed for vascular
pattern observation. Blood samples of proband and parents were obtained after a signed informed consent. Parents informed consent was also
given to analyse their own genomes. We explained that analysis of the parents would be useful to better understand the proband results. When
CGHa is performed, obtaining blood samples from parents is part of our standard care. Conventional high resolution karyotyping (GTG banding)
was performed on proband blood lymphocytes following conventional procedures. For CGHa analysis genomic DNA was isolated from an EDTA
peripheral blood sample using QIAamp Blood Midi Kit according to the manufacturer procedure (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Molecular karyotyping
was performed in accordance with the manufacturer procedure with an 180,000-oligonucleotide microarray (Sure Print G3 Human CGH Microarray
Kit 180 k, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The genomic sample was labelled and hybridized according with the Agilent Enzymatic
Labelling protocol. We used a male DNA Coriell GM10851 (Coriell Institute, Camden, NJ, USA) as a normal reference. CGH Agilent Genomic
Workbench Lite Edition 6.5.0.18 software and UCSC hg19 assembly were used to analyze the results. The presence of a copy number variation
was defined by the presence of an abnormal log2 ratio for at least three contiguous oligonucleotides. The presence of the deletion in our
patient was confirmed by quantitative PCR using 7300 Real Time PCR System (Applied BioSystems, Foster City, CA, USA) (data not shown).
Primers inside OSGIN1, EMC8, ZDHHC7 genes were employed. Microsatellites located into the deletion were analyzed by PCR and capillary
electrophoresis sizing of the products. Microsatellites were amplified using the following primers:L17941, Forward: 5′- 6FAM-
CTGGGTACTCTTCTGTGACA-3′;Reverse: 5′-CTCTCTCCCCAACATGGTG-3′.L29692, Forward: 5′-6FAM-TGTGTGTCTTCTGGGGGAGT-3′;Reverse:
5′-CACAGCTAGCCACAGGCAG-3′ L17941, Forward: 5′- 6FAM-CTGGGTACTCTTCTGTGACA-3′; Reverse: 5′-CTCTCTCCCCAACATGGTG-3′. L29692, Forward: 5′-6FAM-
TGTGTGTCTTCTGGGGGAGT-3′; Reverse: 5′-CACAGCTAGCCACAGGCAG-3′ The amplified products were analyzed by capillary electrophoresis (3500 IDX
sequencer, Life Technologies). Histopathological analysis of the lungs showed marks of PCH (Fig. 1, panel a). Sections of the lung reveal
lobular architecture with acinar underdevelopment and numerous dilated vascular channels within the thickened septa. Reduced radial-alveolar
count was detected, reflective of decreased alveolarization. Air-blood barriers were detected within the alveolar walls; however, a rich,
congested, proliferated capillary network was present within interalveolar septa. This is associated with some hemorrhage into the airspace
as well as some regions with large number of hystiocytes in the airspaces. Preacinar and intra-acinar arteries had thick smooth muscle
medial coats and there was an extension of smooth muscle into the peripheral intra-acinar arteries up to the alveolar wall level. In
addition, a thick collagen adventitial coat was present around the preacinar arteries. These structural features, are reminiscent of those
present in persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. Abnormalities of pulmonary lymphatics were not present. No pulmonary venous
misaligment or obstructive/occlusive changes are discerned. Immunohistochemical analysis of CD31 demonstrates septal capillaries dilatation
and proliferation (Fig. 1, panel b). Altogether, these features indicate the presence of an intractable hypertensive pulmonary vascular
disease of the newborn consistent with the morphologic characteristics of pulmonary hemangiomatosis with structural abnormalities in
preacinar and intra-acinar pulmonary arteries (“post-resistant segment of the vasculature”).Fig. 1Microscopic evaluation of lung tissues.
Panel a, histologic image (Hematoxilin-Eosin, 20X) of lung autoptic sample showing widespread proliferation of septal capillaries with
extensive alveolar hemorrhage, without a proliferation in septal, or lung bronchovascular bundles. Panel b, CD31 endothelial immunostaining
(20X) demonstrates marked septal capillaries dilatation and proliferation Microscopic evaluation of lung tissues. Panel a, histologic image
(Hematoxilin-Eosin, 20X) of lung autoptic sample showing widespread proliferation of septal capillaries with extensive alveolar hemorrhage,
without a proliferation in septal, or lung bronchovascular bundles. Panel b, CD31 endothelial immunostaining (20X) demonstrates marked
septal capillaries dilatation and proliferation Standard karyotyping showed no abnormalities (46,XY). CGHa identified a submicroscopic
deletion in 16q23.3q24.1 cytoband (deletion size 2.6 Mb) (Fig. 2). The deletion spans from 83,676,990 to 86,292,585 bp, encompassing
LINC01082 and disrupting LINC01081, which are long non-coding RNAs located in the FOXF1 tissue-specific distant enhancer, mapping 0.3 Mb
upstream FOX genes cluster . Positions are referred to Genome Assembly hg19. In the Additional file 1: Table S1 all genes contained in the
deletion are listed. Among them, only the DNAAF1 gene deficiency is known to cause a lung disease, i.e. the primary ciliary dyskinesia (or
Karatgener syndrome), in which, however, airways cilia, but not alveoli and their vessels, are affected.Fig. 2CGHa analysis. Panel a, CGH
signals of patient’s chromosome 16. The deleted region is highlighted by a brown area. Panel b, chromosome 16 region containing the
deletion. The deleted region is shown in red. Positions of FOX genes are shown in black. Positions of microsatellites LINC01081 and
LINC01082 utilized for analysis are shown in green. Location of genes utilized for quantitative PCR are shown in blue. Base-pairs are
numbered according to hg19 CGHa analysis. Panel a, CGH signals of patient’s chromosome 16. The deleted region is highlighted by a brown
area. Panel b, chromosome 16 region containing the deletion. The deleted region is shown in red. Positions of FOX genes are shown in black.
Positions of microsatellites LINC01081 and LINC01082 utilized for analysis are shown in green. Location of genes utilized for quantitative
PCR are shown in blue. Base-pairs are numbered according to hg19 No other pathogenetic genomic imbalance was detected in the proband sample.
Deletions in this region have been recently found in patients with Alveolar Capillary Dysplasia with Misalignment of Pulmonary Veins
(ACD/MPV) . In Fig. 3 are shown all deletions of the FOXF1 region so far identified in patients with ACD/MPV. PCH and ACD/MPV are two
different diseases related to opposite phenomena in lung development disruption. In fact, PCH is characterized by capillaries proliferation
in pulmonary interstitium [4, 5], while in ACD/MPC immature lobular development and reduced capillary density are present [8, 9]. In our
patient, acinar underdevelopment and decreased alveolarization were present, which are reminiscent of ACD/MPV. However, we did not find the
other typical feature of ACD/MPV, i.e. misalignment of pulmonary veins, in our case. Instead, the major histological finding of our patient
was the capillary proliferation within the interalveolar septa, which is typical in PCH.Fig. 3Deletions associated with PCH and ACD/MPV. The
map of the FOXF1 region is represented at the top: the FOXF1 gene and the long non-coding RNAs LINC01081 and LINC01082 are shown. The gray
bar below indicates the deletion found in our PCH patients, while black bars indicate deletions in patients with ACD/MPV so far found
Deletions associated with PCH and ACD/MPV. The map of the FOXF1 region is represented at the top: the FOXF1 gene and the long non-coding
RNAs LINC01081 and LINC01082 are shown. The gray bar below indicates the deletion found in our PCH patients, while black bars indicate
deletions in patients with ACD/MPV so far found By quantitative PCR, our patient parents were evaluated: both subjects presented no
abnormalities, thus suggesting the de novo origin of the deletion. It is known that the 16q23.3q24.1 region could be subjected to parental
imprinting; in fact, in ACD/MPV, the deletion always occurs in the maternal chromosome and the paternal allele is less expressed than the
maternal one . Thus, in order to test whether the 16q23.3q24.1 deletion occurred in the maternal chromosome, a microsatellite analysis was
conducted inside the deletion. As shown in Fig. 4, analysis of L17941 and L29692 microsatellites indicate that the deletion indeed occurs in
the maternal chromosome.Fig. 4Microsatellite analysis. Top, electropherograms of L17941 (left) and L29692 (right). Bottom, pedigree of the
family with alleles of L17941 and L29692 present in each subject. Numbers correspond to the base-pair length of each allele Microsatellite
analysis. Top, electropherograms of L17941 (left) and L29692 (right). Bottom, pedigree of the family with alleles of L17941 and L29692
present in each subject. Numbers correspond to the base-pair length of each allele The PCH histopathologic lungs features show a crowded and
congested alveolar capillary bed without pulmonary venous misalignment and lymphatic alteration. The alveolar capillary expansion is usually
associated with intraalveolar hemorrhage [4, 5]. Based upon our microscopical findings, our patient suffers of PCH with structural
abnormalities in preacinar and intra-acinar pulmonary arteries, consistent with the morphologic characteristics of persistent pulmonary
hypertension of the newborn. The radial-alveolar counts were reduced, reflective of decreased alveolarization. PCH is considered an
underestimated pathology, because it may mimic idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension, pulmonary veno-occlusive disease, atypical
interstitial lung disease, misaligment of lung vessel and alveolar capillary dysplasia or congenital pulmonary lymphangectasia [2, 11–13].
Based on familial occurrence, it is possible that congenital forms of this disease may have a genetic determination. Best et al. have shown
the involvement of EIF2AK4 gene mutations in PCH pathogenesis. However, it is likely that EIF2AK4 mutations do not account for all cases of
PCH . In our case, CGHa revealed a chromosome 16q23.3-q24.1 deletion that disrupts the distant FOXF1 transcriptional enhancer, which maps
about 257 kb upstream to the FOXF1 gene. In this enhancer are located two lncRNAs: LINC01081 and LINC01082 . It has been demonstrated that
in vitro abolition of LINC01081 by siRNA, reduces FOXF1 expression . Thus, our data could suggest that the disruption of the FOXF1 gene
transcriptional enhancer induces cell proliferation and migration. This is consistent with other findings indicating FOXF1 as an
oncosuppressor gene [15, 16]. The analysis of fusion progeny between mesenchymal stem cells and lung cancer cells has recently demonstrated
that FOXF1 significantly reduced the growth rate and expression levels of proteins regulating the cell cycle . Accordingly, previous
investigations have proposed PCH to be a lung endothelial neoplasia . Based upon the relevance of LINC01081 on FOXF1 expression regulation,
our data could suggest that the disruption of this long non-coding RNA can lead to architectural changes in pulmonary vessels, resulting in
neonatal-onset PCH. This study has been performed in accordance with the Helsinki declaration. Written informed consent was obtained from
the parents of the patient for publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. Additional file 1: Table S1. Genes involved in our PCH patient deletion. (DOCX 18 kb) Genes involved in our PCH patient deletion.
(DOCX 18 kb) Competing interests The authors declare not have competing interests. Authors’ contributions PDL, CGH analysis and contribution
in writing the paper; AF, Microsatellites analysis; FB, Quantitative PCR; CP, (Cinzia Puppin) interpretation of molecular data and
contribution in writing the paper; GDM, Histology and immunohistochemistry; CP, (Carla Pittini) clinical evaluation and counselling; LC,
Clinical evaluation; SP, histology, immunohistochemistry and contribution in writing the paper; GD, Conception of the study and writing the
paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work has been funded by the Interreg SIGN (Slovenian Italian Genetic
Network) project. We thank Catia Mio for the critical review of the manuscript.
