Solitary plasmacytoma of the bone, especially of a single rib, is a rare disease. We present the case of a 44-year-old Han Chinese man who
was diagnosed with a solitary plasmacytoma of the bone located in the right sixth rib. The patient presented with a 4-year history of
continuous pain in the right chest area and moderate fever lasting 7 days. A chest roentgenogram showed a solitary expanding lesion in the
right thorax, and chest computed tomography revealed an osteolytic tumor in the chest wall. The patient underwent complete en-bloc resection
of the chest wall, including the ribs, muscle, and parietal pleura. Histologically, the resected mass was composed of abundant neoplastic
plasma cells, and the diagnosis was confirmed to be a plasmacytoma of rib. The examination of marrow cells showed 9 % normal plasma cells
among karyocytes without clonal disease. On postoperative day 14, the patient underwent thoracic radiotherapy with a total dose of 50 Gy.
The patient remained asymptomatic during the 6-month follow-up period. Herein, we also review previous reports on solitary plasmacytomas of
the rib. In summary, this report provides further insights for the diagnosis and effective treatment of this rare disease. Solitary
plasmacytoma of bone (SPB) is a rare localized neoplasm that accounts for only 5 % of malignant plasma cell tumors . SPBs typically occur in
the vertebrae or pelvic bones, with presentation in the rib being less common [2, 3]. SPBs are characterized by the presence of only one or
two isolated bone lesions with no evidence of disease dissemination and are generally considered to be curable with surgical resection and
radiotherapy . In most cases, SPBs present as osteolytic lesions of the bone on chest X-ray . Herein, we report a case of solitary
plasmacytoma of the rib (SPR) with unique clinical features. A 44-year-old man visited our clinic complaining of continuous pain in the
right chest area for 4 years and moderate fever for 7 days. He had no history of trauma or tuberculosis. A chest roentgenogram (Fig. 1a) and
chest computed tomography (CT) (Fig. 2a and b) revealed a 6.11 cm × 9.33 cm, oval opacity in the right side of the chest, which was highly
suspected to be an intra-thoracic tumor originating from the pleura or rib. Spiral CT three-dimensional reconstruction showed an osteolytic
lesion in the right sixth rib (Fig. 2c and d), and abnormally increased uptake of radioisotope around the right sixth rib was observed in a
bone scan (Fig. 1b). The radiologic features suggested a focal lytic lesion in the right sixth rib and limited pleura thickening (Fig. 2a
and b). Peripheral blood examination showed no abnormalities (Table 1). Therefore, we decided to remove the lesion via a surgical approach
for the treatment and diagnosis of the tumor. A standard posterolateral thoracotomy was performed along the fifth intercostal space. We
completely resected the tumor and the surrounding fifth and seventh ribs with a safety margin of at least 3 cm. Adherent parietal pleura at
the tumor site was also resected. During the operation, no pleural dissemination was found. Reconstruction of the chest wall defect was
accomplished using a tension-free dacron patch (Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ, USA). The gross pathology of the resected specimen
showed an irregular, pale, soft, and friable tumor (Fig. 3a). Histological analysis of the resected tumor revealed abundant neoplastic
plasma cells in the lesion (Fig. 3b). Immunohistochemical staining of the specimen showed positive staining for CD38 and CD138 (Fig. 3c and
d). No M-protein in the serum or urine was found by immunoelectrophoresis. A biopsy of the bone marrow along with aspiration revealed that
normal plasma cells accounted for 9 % of karyocytes, and these cells expressed CD38, CD138, CD19, and CD45 (Table 1). These characteristics
were consistent with a diagnosis of plasmacytoma, excluding the possibility of multiple myeloma (MM).Fig. 1Preoperative chest roentgenogram
and bone scanning examinations. Chest roentgenogram showing a solitary expanding lesion in the right sixth rib (arrow, a). Abnormally
increased uptake of radioisotope in the right sixth rib on a bone scan (b)Fig. 2Spiral computed tomography showing more detailed imagery and
data. Three-dimensional computed tomographic image of the chest showing an irregular mass projecting into the thorax (arrow, a, b and c) and
a focal lytic lesion in the sixth rib (black arrow, b). Spiral CT 3D reconstruction showing the absence of the right sixth rib (arrow,
d)Table 1Summary of laboratory test resultsInvestigationLevels (normal range)Blood routine test White blood cell count6.21
(3.5–9.5 × 109) Red blood cell count4.35 (4.3–5.8 × 1012) Hemoglobin130 (130–175 g/l) Platelet count427 (125–350 × 109) Erythrocyte
sedimentation rate6 mm/1st hourBlood biochemical examination Urea5.49 mmol/L (3.2–7.0) Creatinine74.1 μmol/L (44–115) Uric Acid224 μmol/L
(210–430) Sodium139 mmol/L (137–147) Calcium2.33 mmol/L (2.10–2.60) Magnesium0.82 mmol/L (0.8–1.0)Electrophoresis of proteins and
immunoglobulins Total protein77.98 g/l (60–80) Albumin44.2 g/l (33–55) Globin33.78 g/l (15–35) M-protein(−) Alfa1-globulin4.1 %
(1.4–2.9) Alfa2-globulin12.5 % (7–11) Beta-globulin11.3 % (8–13) Gammab-protein25 % (9–16) IgG1310 mg/dl (751–1560) IgA212 mg/dl
(82–453) IgM164 mg/dl (46–304) Kappa light chain1050 mg/dl (629–1350) Lambda light chain649 mg/dl (313–723) K/L1.62 Kappa light chain
(urine)1.92 mg/dl (0–1.85) Lambda light chain (urine)<5.0 mg/dl (0–5)Examination of marrow cell Pathology: granulocytes, erythrocytes and
giant cells are proliferous and active. Normal plasma cells are 9 % karyocytes. CD38, CD138, CD19 and CD45 (+), CD13, CD20, CD117,CD28 and
CD56 (−). Chromosome examinations:46,XY (20), no clonal disorder RB-1 gene : no abnormalities IgH gene: no abnormalitiesTP53 gene: no
abnormalitiesFig. 3Gross specimen and pathological findings. The tumor (arrow) was resected with the surrounding fifth to seventh ribs, with
a safety margin of at least 3 cm (a). Microscopic view shows abundant neoplastic plasma cells (H&E, ×400) (b). Immunohistochemical staining
showed that the specimen is positive for CD38 (c) and CD138 (d) Preoperative chest roentgenogram and bone scanning examinations. Chest
roentgenogram showing a solitary expanding lesion in the right sixth rib (arrow, a). Abnormally increased uptake of radioisotope in the
right sixth rib on a bone scan (b) Spiral computed tomography showing more detailed imagery and data. Three-dimensional computed tomographic
image of the chest showing an irregular mass projecting into the thorax (arrow, a, b and c) and a focal lytic lesion in the sixth rib (black
arrow, b). Spiral CT 3D reconstruction showing the absence of the right sixth rib (arrow, d) Summary of laboratory test results Gross
specimen and pathological findings. The tumor (arrow) was resected with the surrounding fifth to seventh ribs, with a safety margin of at
least 3 cm (a). Microscopic view shows abundant neoplastic plasma cells (H&E, ×400) (b). Immunohistochemical staining showed that the
specimen is positive for CD38 (c) and CD138 (d) Starting in postoperative day 15, radiation therapy with a total target dose of 50 Gy
(2 Gy/d, 25 days) was administered to tissue surrounding the area of the resected tumor. The patient was followed up at 6 months after
surgery and was relapse-free with no recurrence according to a chest CT scan (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Follow-up chest computed tomography scan. No
residual tumor or recurrence was found in the lungs (a) or chest wall (b) Follow-up chest computed tomography scan. No residual tumor or
recurrence was found in the lungs (a) or chest wall (b) SPB accounts for about 5 % of plasmacytomas [1, 6]. SPBs occur more commonly in
males than in females, at an estimated ratio of 2:1 , and the median age of patients is approximately 55 years, which is about 10 years
younger than patients with MM . Thus far, few studies have compared SPRs with SPBs in other bones. We conducted an English literature search
using the search terms “solitary plasmacytoma” and “rib” on Pudmed and found 18 case reports published between 1992 and 2014 (Table 2).
Among these SPR patients, 14 were male and four were female (male to female ratio, 3.5:1), and their ages ranged from 26–75 years (median,
52 years). The ratio of tumor occurrence in right ribs to left ones was 1.6:1, and the majority of tumors occurred on the fourth and fifth
ribs (56 %).Table 2Characteristics of solitary plasmacytoma of the ribReferenceSexAgeSymptomLocationRadiologic
findingsTreatmentPrognosisCaffery T,2014 M33Chest painR-5th ribOR and pleural effusionRRelapse-free at 2-year follow-upTajima K,2014
M71Chest pain,mild dyspneaR-3th ribOR and CWTSRelapse-free for 1.5 years follow-upSantos VM,2012 F65Breathlessness,discrete
expectorationR-4th ribOR and CWTPlasmapheresisPulmonary acute edema for progressive disease into MMLee HY,2012 M73Chest painR-5th ribOR and
CWTS + RNo mentionSingal R,2011 F43Chest pain, coughingR-5th ribOR,CWT,and pleural effusionSRelapse-free for 2.5 years follow-upKodate
M,2010 M70Chest massR-4th ribOR and CWTS + R + CRelapse-free for 2 years and 9 months follow-upPattanayak L,2010 M60Chest painR-4th ribOR
and CWTRRemission after 8 monthsKetata W,2009 M60Dyspnea, dry cough, chest painL-first ribORS + RRemission after 8 monthsPalao S,2006
M32Progressive symmetrical paraparesis and paresthesias in feet (demyelinating- polyradiculoneuropathy)L-3th ribORS + RAsymptomatic after
surgeryBousnina S,2006 M52Chest massL-6th ribOR and CWTRRemission at 1 yearWilkinson S,2003 M35Axillary-lymphadenopathy (Castleman’s
disease)R-10th ribORS + RRelapse-free at 2-year follow-upGeorge SM,2002 M29Chest massR-11th ribOR and CWTSNo mentionSato Y,2001 M46Chest
massR-5th ribOR and CWTSNo mentionKadokura M,2000 M44Left back painL-7th ribOR and CWTS + CRelapse-free at 2-year follow-upMankodi AK,1999
F26Distal limb weaknessL-6th ribORSImprovement in symptoms at 6 months of follow-upHirai T,1995 F72Chest painR-5th ribORSRelapse-free for
1.7 years of follow-upCarvajal,1994 M45Horner’s syndromeL-first ribOR and CWTS + RRelapse-free for 2 years of follow-upIkeda T,1992 M75Chest
painL-4th ribOR and CWTRDevelop into MMS surgery, R radiotherapy, C chemotherapy, OR Osteolytic rib, CWT Chest-wall tumor Characteristics of
solitary plasmacytoma of the rib S surgery, R radiotherapy, C chemotherapy, OR Osteolytic rib, CWT Chest-wall tumor The clinical
presentation of SPR varies significantly. The most common symptom is pain due to progression of osteoclasia or oncothlipsis [8, 9, 11, 12,
14, 15, 21, 23, 25], but some cases are asymptomatic and found based on a chest mass during physical examinations [13, 14, 17, 19, 20].
Other chief complaints include limb weakness [16, 22], Horner’s syndrome , and axillary lymphadenectasis . All the reported cases showed
osteolytic ribs on radiologic examination, including 12 cases with a chest mass [9–14, 17, 19–21, 24, 25] and two with pleural effusion [8,
12]. In our case, CT showed an irregular intrathoracic mass with heterogeneous density in the right sixth osteolytic rib with adjacent
pleural thickening. The currently recommended diagnostic criteria for SPB include the following: (i) clinical and radiological evidence of a
single area of bone destruction on skeletal survey; (ii) histological confirmation of plasma cell histology; (iii) normal marrow without
clonal disease; (iv) absence of anemia, hypercalcemia, or renal impairment attributable to myeloma; and (v) absent or low serum or urinary
level of monoclonal protein (called Bence-Jones protein) and preserved levels of uninvolved immunoglobulins. Therefore, the diagnosis of our
case was based on the following findings: osteolytic rib observed by imaging, histopathological evidence of plasmacytoma, and absence of MM
features on bone marrow examination. Surgical intervention is the first choice of treatment for SPB, and a complete resection is expected to
be curative. Bataille et al. reported 114 cases of solitary myeloma and showed that the lowest incidence of progressive disease was observed
in patients with peripheral solitary plasmacytoma treated with surgery plus an adequate dose of radiation therapy. Aviles et al.
demonstrated that most patients treated with adequate radiation therapy alone will develop MM within 3 years. With respect to the radiation
dose, Mendenhall et al. reported that the local failure rates were 6 and 31 % in patients with a solitary plasmacytoma treated with doses of
40 Gy or greater and doses below 40 Gy, respectively. It is recommended that SPB be treated with radical radiotherapy, encompassing the
tumor volume shown on magnetic resonance imaging with a margin of at least 2 cm and treated to a dose of 40 Gy in 20 fractions. For a SPB
with a tumor size of >5 cm, a higher dose of up to 50 Gy in 25 fractions should be considered . The role of adjuvant chemotherapy in
preventing progression to MM remains unclear. Some reports suggest that adjuvant chemotherapy does not affect the incidence of conversion
from SPB into MM but could delay its progression to MM . Patients not responsive to radiotherapy could be treated with chemotherapy, with a
similar approach to that used in the treatment of MM , but the effectiveness of chemotherapy for SPR remains to be determined. Our patient
received a complete en-bloc resection and postoperative 50 Gy of radiotherapy, with no relapse at 6 months after surgery, indicating that
our surgery plus radiation therapy was efficacious. It is generally accepted that patients with SPB have an indolent course of disease, with
a median survival time of 10.7 years and 5-, 10-, and 20-year survival rates of 75, 52, and 37 %, respectively . However, Warsame et al.
reported that in a study of 127 SPB patients followed up for 7–28 months (median, 56 months), 85 patients (67 %) progressed to MM and 27
patients (21 %) died of progression. In conclusion, SPRs show an earlier average age of onset and higher male to female incidence ratio than
SPBs located in other bones, according to the literature review. SPRs should be considered when confronted with a lytic tumor of the rib.
The treatment is based on surgery and radiotherapy. SPRs are often resectable, and the prognosis is generally good and dominated by the risk
of progression to MM. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Solitary plasmacytoma of bone Computed
tomography Solitary plasmacytoma of the rib Multiple myeloma Rui Jia and Lei Xue contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions ZFZ, study concept and design; RJ and LX, drafting and
finalization of the manuscript, preparation of the figures, acquisition of data, and analysis and interpretation of data; KG, HGL and JL,
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content and material support; and all authors read and approved the final
manuscript. Authors’ information Rui Jia, Master’s degree, attending surgeon; Lei Xue, Associate Chief Physician; Huagang Liang, PhD,
Superintendent of the Institution, chief surgeon; Kun Gao, Master’s degree, associate chief surgeon; Jian LI, Master’s degree, resident
surgeon; Zhefeng Zhang, PhD, attending surgeon, We thank our colleagues in the Departments of Thoracic Surgery and Pathology of our hospital
for helpful discussions.
