Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a specific malignant hematological disorder with a diagnostic hallmark of chromosome translocation
t(15;17)(q22;q21). As a very rare secondary cytogenetic aberration in pediatric APL, ider(17q) (q10)t(15;17) was suggested to be a poor
prognostic factor based on previous case reports. Here, we report a pediatric APL case with a rare karyotype of ider(17)(q10)t(15;17). Bone
marrow aspiration, immunophenotyping, molecular biology, cytogenetic, and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses were performed
at initial diagnosis and during the treatment. A 6-year-old boy was brought to our hospital with the chief complaint of bleeding gums twice
and intermittent fever for 3 days in January 2013. He was diagnosed as low-risk APL according to the 2012 NCCN guideline on APL, with the
expression of PML-RARA (bcr3 subtype) and the karyotype of 46,XY, der(15)t(15;17)(q22;q21),ider(17)(q10)t(15;17), which was further verified
by FISH. The patient was treated through combination all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic with daunorubicin according to the 2012 NCCN
guideline for APL. Continuous hematological completed remission (HCR) and major molecular remission (MMR) were achieved with normal
karyotype for >28 months after induction chemotherapy. Different from previously reported cases, this pediatric APL patient with
ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) displays favorable clinical outcomes, which might be related to the low-risk classification and arsenic treatment
during the treatment. It suggests that ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) may not be the sole determinant for worse outcomes in pediatric APL and implies
that more contributed factors should be considered for pediatric APL prognosis. The fusion gene PML-RARA generated from chromosome
translocation t(15;17)(q22;q21) has been identified as a distinguished marker for acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).1 Classic cytogenetics
combined with florescence in situ hybridization (FISH) indicates 90% of typical t(15;17) and some rare case of atypical translocations such
as t(5;17), t(11;17), and dup(17)(q21q23) in APL.2 In the past decades, owing to the utilization of all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) in
combination with arsenic and other chemotherapies, APL has been one of most curable leukemia types.3–5 As high as 95% of newly diagnosed APL
patients with the PML-RARA fusion gene could achieve completed remission (CR) after the treatments, in which ∼80% reaches long-term event-
free survival. However, a small population of APL patients still show poor outcomes after post-remission chemotherapy, which may be
attributed to some featured genetic abnormalities as well as changes in treatment response, relapse, and clinical pathological
characters.6–9 The ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)(q22;q12)6,10–15 is one of the rare secondary genetic abnormalities in APL. To the best of our
knowledge, only 4 pediatric APL cases with ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)(q22;q12) were reported in the literature and all of them died in 1 to 21
months after diagnosis.16–19 These data suggest that ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)(q22;q12) is likely to be a poor prognostic marker for pediatric
APL. Different from previous reports, we first report a pediatric APL case with the rare karyotype of ider(17)(q10)t(15;17), which still
remains CR for 28 months until now. A 6-year-old boy was brought to our hospital with the chief complaint of bleeding gums twice and
intermittent fever for 3 days in January 2013. He had a fever of 38.2 Celsius, multiple cervical lymphadenopathy, scattered bleeder in both
lower limbs and enlarged liver at 2 cm of the subcostal. No special contact, allergies, medicine, or family history were present. No more
positive signs were found. The initial blood count showed pancytopenia (Hb, 95 g/L; red blood cell count, 3.18 × 1012/L; platelet count,
57 × 109/L; and white blood cell count, 2.23 × 109/L). The bone marrow morphology displayed a hypercellular marrow with increased abnormal
promyelocytes, which were variable in the cell size and nucleolus, rich in cytoplasm and varying granules, and visible of round or oval,
distorted, folded nucleus, accounting for 87.5% of all nucleated cells. Bone marrow specimens were also positive for myeloperoxidase and
nonspecific esterase staining (Fig. 1). Flow cytometry analysis (Fig. 2) with the bone marrow showed that ∼91.5% of blasts were strongly
positive for CD9, CD13, CD15, CD33, CD45, CD64, CD123, Myeloperoxidase, with partial expression of CD38, CD117, HLA-DR, CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5,
CD7, CD8, CD10, CD11b, CD14, CD16, CD19, CD20, CD22, and CD34, whereas CD56, CD71, GlyA, cCD79a, cCD3, TdT were negative (Tables 1 and 2).
Cytogenetic studies showed a karyotype of 46,XY, der(15)t(15;17)(q22;q21), ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) according to ISCN200920 (Fig. 3A and B).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with Vysis LSI PML/RARα dual color, dual fusion translocation probe (Abbott Molecular, IL)
revealed nuc ish (nuclear in situ hybridization) (PML × 4)(RARA × 4)(PML con RARA × 3) (Fig. 3C and D). The fusion PML-RARA gene in this
patient was furthered characterized as bcr3 subtype by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). Therefore, the patient
was diagnosed as APL according to bone marrow morphology, immunophenotyping, cytogenetics, and molecular biology studies. Subsequently, the
patient was administrated with induction chemotherapy consisting of ATRA at a dose of 45 mg/m2/d for 33 days, arsenic trioxide 0.15 mg/kg/d
for 27 days, and daunorubicin 60 mg/m2/d for 3 days. Bone marrow morphology at initial diagnosis. Bone marrow aspiration showed a
hypercellular marrow with increased abnormal promyelocytes, which were variable in the cell size and nucleolus, rich in cytoplasm and
varying granules, and visible of round or oval, distorted, folded nucleus. Immunophenotyping of bone marrow at initial diagnosis. In the dot
plot of CD45/side scatter (SSC), the abnormal APL leukemia cells were continuously distributed from immature to mature granulocytes cells
area. The abnormal promyelocytes comprised 91.5% of the nucleated cells and expressed CD9, CD13, CD15, CD33, CD45, CD64, CD123,
Myeloperoxidase (MPO), also with partial expression of CD38 and CD117. APL = acute promyelocytic leukemia. Comparison Between Previous 4
Reports and Present Study With ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)(q22;q12) Positive APL The Percentages of the Detected Antigens in this Patient by Flow
Cytometry Karyotype and FISH analysis at initial diagnosis. A: the karyotyping from 20 bone marrow metaphase cells showed
46,XY,der(15)t(15;17)(q22;q21),ider (17)(q10)t(15;17). The arrows indicate abnormal chromosomes. B: one of the metaphase karyograms of the
bone marrow cells at initial diagnosis. The arrows indicate der(15) and ider(17)(q10)t(15;17). C: the FISH study using an LSI PML-RARA dual-
color, dual-fusion translocation probe (Abbott Molecular/Vysis) at diagnosis. The arrows indicate positive PML-RARA fusion signals (3 fusion
signals in a cell). D: karyotyping and PML-RARA FISH analysis in the same metaphase cell. FISH = fluorescence in situ hybridization. After
the induction chemotherapy, the blood cell counts came back to normal levels and bone marrow aspirate showed hematological completed
remission (HCR) but not major molecular remission (MMR) with detection out of PML-RARA by RT-qPCR. Then, one cycle of DA regimen
(Daunorubicin 60 mg/m2/d, d1-3;cytarabine 200 mg/m2/d, d1-7) and another cycle of DA regimen (Daunorubicin 45 mg/m2/d, d1-3;cytarabine
1 g/m2/12 h, d1-4) were administrated to the patient as the consolidation chemotherapy. After the consolidation therapy, the patient
achieved MMR (the PML-RARA was undetectable by RT-qPCR) under HCR. Maintenance chemotherapy was still continued following the consolidation
chemotherapy according to the 2012 NCCN guideline for APL. No serious side reactions occurred in the chemotherapy process. During and after
the maintenance chemotherapy, this patient was always under persistent MMR and HCR without any clinical symptoms or signs till now. The
patient provided written informed consent for the publication of this case details and the consent procedure was approved by the ethic
committee for Drug Clinical Trial of Huazhong University of Science and Technology. The ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) is a derived isochromosomal
abnormality on the long arm of chromosome 17 with APL unique reciprocal translocation of t(15;17). It is also a rare cytogenetic abnormality
in APL. From January 2013 to December 2014, we detected 12 cases with the karyotype of ider(17) (q10)t(15;17) in 635 APL patients with
t(15;17) in our center. They are at the average age of 29.6 years (from 6 to 75 years old). The incidence of ider(17) (q10)t(15;17) in our
center is 1.89%, which is consistent with previous report.6 Although previous studies11,21 reported that the ider(17q)(q10)t(15;17) had a
slightly higher frequency in APL patients with PML-RARA bcr1 subtype, which might be related to delayed CR and lower sensitivity to ATRA
treatment, we found no significant correlation between ider(17) (q10)t(15;17) and 3 isoforms of PML-RARA gene (bcr1, bcr 2 and bcr3
subtypes) in our center, which may be caused by the rarity of ider(17) (q10)t(15;17) since we only have 12 ider(17) (q10)t(15;17) positive
cases until now. To the best of our knowledge, only 4 pediatric APL cases with the ider(17q)(q10)t(15;17) have been reported in the
literature so far.21–23 The role of the ider(17q)(q10)t(15;17) in APL is still an ongoing investigation and all of the previous studies
considered it as a poor prognosis maker for APL especially in pediatric APL patients.2,6,10,17,21 As shown in Table 1, no matter the
variable clinical and laboratory features as wells as different treatments, 1 of the 4 reported pediatric patients did not achieve CR at all
and died in the first month from the initial diagnosis, whereas the remained 3 cases relapsed and died within 13 to 21 survival months.16–19
Interestingly, Hu and colleagues21 showed that the ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) had a proliferation and growth advantage, which might be mediated
by loss of a tumor suppressor TP53 allele. However, no drug-sensitive analysis has been performed in the ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) positive
clones and the detailed role of TP53 copy number variation in these clones is still mysterious. The sensitivity of these clones containing
the ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) to ATRA, arsentic trioxide and other chemotherapy drugs is still unknown and need further studies. Interestingly,
the case we presented here displayed encouraging clinical outcomes until now. He was treated with both ATRA and arsenic and achieved HCR
after induction therapy and MMR after consolidation therapy. After consolidation chemotherapy, this patient was still under continuous HCR
and MMR for >28 months until now by detection of MRD every 3 months. Besides, no serious complications and side effects (such as the ATRA
syndrome) of chemotherapeutic agents occurred during and after serials of therapies. This is the first case report of pediatric APL with
ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) showing favorable outcomes after chemotherapy. It suggests that the ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) may not be the sole
determinants for worse outcomes in pediatric APL and more contributed factors need to be considered for pediatric APL prognosis. As an
inference, we think the encouraging clinical outcomes from this case may be attributed to 2 important factors. First, this patient was
classified in the low-risk group at the initial diagnosis stage according to the 2012 NCCN guideline for APL. The risk classification is
very important for APL, especially pediatric APL, and it correlates very well with the therapeutic effects, clinical outcomes, and relapse.
Basically, low-risk classification means better response to treatment and less relapse. Second, we think the patient may also benefit from
the early usage of arsenic trioxide. As one of the most famous Chinese traditional medicaments, arsenic trioxide has been shown powerful
therapeutic effects in APL and has been the standard treatment for APL patients in both induction and maintenance chemotherapies.
Combination of ATRA and arsenic also has synergistic effects in APL patients during induction therapy due to their different pharmacology
targets (ATRA targets RARα and arsenic targets PML).24,25 For the 4 previously reported pediatric APL cases with the ider(17)(q10)t(15;17),
2 of them18,19 were reported in 1986 and 1987, which were before the starting of ATRA treatment in 1988. The remaining 2 cases also did not
involve the combination of ATRA and arsenic in the induction chemotherapy.16,17 Therefore, we infer that the patient reported here may
benefit from the combination of ATRA and arsenic in the induction chemotherapy. However, more case reports and systematic analysis are
needed to study the role of ATRA and arsenic in the treatment of pediatric APL patients with the ider(17)(q10)t(15;17). Abbreviations: APL =
acute promyelocytic leukemia, ATRA = all-trans retinoic acid, CR = completed remission, FISH = fluorescene in situ hybridization, HCR =
hematological completed remission, MMR = major molecular remission, MRD = minimal residual disease, NCCN = national comprehensive cancer
network, RT-qPCR = real time quantitative polymerase chain reaction. YH and PW equally contributed to this study. Authors and their
contributions: YH performed study in cytogenetic, FISH and flow cytometry, wrote the paper. PW performed study in clinical lab tests and
molecular biology. KL provided assistant to perform the experiment and modified the paper. XC analyzed cytogenetic data. WD analyzed flow
cytometric data. JL analyzed FISH data. YH contributed important reagents. YB collected clinical data. WL analyzed morphological data. XL
analyzed molecular data. RJ clinical guiding. MZ Clinical guiding and paper modification. JZ designed the study and wrote paper. This
research was supported by grants-in-aid from the National Young Scientist's Programs of China (No. 81100356, 81202093, 81201552). The
authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
