Emphysematous cholecystitis is a severe variant of acute cholecystitis caused by anaerobic bacteria. Although intraperitoneal air as a
complication has been described in association with emphysematous cholecystitis, pneumoretroperitoneum arising from emphysematous
cholecystitis is extremely rare. Herein, we describe a rare case of pneumoretroperitoneum arising from emphysematous cholecystitis that was
successfully treated with emergency surgery. An 84-year-old male was transported to the Emergency Department of our hospital for acute
abdomen. Computed tomography revealed acute cholecystitis accompanied by emphysematous change. Computed tomography also revealed massive
pneumoretroperitoneum complicated with pneumobilia and gas in the hepatoduodenal ligament. Clinical findings fulfilled the diagnostic
criteria for systemic inflammatory response syndrome and sepsis. Emergency surgery was carried out with a diagnosis of both emphysematous
cholecystitis and gastrointestinal perforation. Intraoperative findings revealed acute gangrenous cholecystitis and pneumoretroperitoneum
presenting with an odor-free foamy abscess along the loose connective tissue behind the ascending colon and mesocolon. No evidence of
gastrointestinal perforation was found during surgery. Therefore, cholecystectomy and lavage drainage were performed. Bacterial culture
examination isolated a single species of anaerobe, Klebsiella pneumoniae, which was considered to be the cause of emphysematous
cholecystitis, pneumobilia, and pneumoretroperitoneum. Emphysematous cholecystitis should be considered as a possible cause of
pneumoretroperitoneum. The present case is the first report of massive pneumoretroperitoneum extending to the dorsal side of the ascending
mesocolon as a complication of emphysematous cholecystitis. Emphysematous cholecystitis (EC) is a rare, severe, potentially lethal variant
of acute cholecystitis characterized clinically by gas accumulation in the wall and lumen of the gallbladder or pericholecystic tissue [1,
2]. It is caused by gas-forming organisms, especially anaerobes, such as Escherichia coli, Aerobacter aerogens, Klebsiella spp, Clostridium
spp, and Salmonella spp, leading to severe complications: gangrene, perforation of the gallbladder, and pericholecystic abscess [3, 4]. The
mortality rate due to EC is reportedly 25 % , which is 4 % higher than all types of acute cholecystitis . Extra-intestinal gas, which
strongly suggests perforation of the gastrointestinal tract, is a critical sign of the need for emergency surgery. Previous reports have
indicated that EC leads to the development of intraperitoneal air over the progression of anaerobic infection [4, 5]. However,
pneumoretroperitoneum complicated with EC is extremely rare. Herein, we describe a rare case of pneumoretroperitoneum arising from EC that
was successfully treated with emergency surgery. An 84-year-old male was transported to the Emergency Department of our hospital for
abdominal pain and vomiting. He had a history of hypertension and cerebral infarction. His vital signs were as follows: pulse, 136
beats/min; blood pressure, 154/75 mmHg; saturation, 93 % in room air; and body temperature, 36.9 °C. His abdomen was not distended, but
there was local tenderness with muscular defense in the right upper abdomen. Laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 26,800/μL
(normal level, <8500/μL) with 91.0 % neutrophils, hemoglobin of 15.4 g/dL (normal level, >13.5 g/dL), glycated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) of
6.9 % (National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program) (normal level, <6.2 %), fasting blood sugar of 195 mg/dL (normal level,
<109 mg/dL), aspartate aminotransferase of 23 IU/L (normal level, <31 IU/L), alanine aminotransferase of 12 IU/L (normal level, <40 IU/L),
alkaline phosphatase of 249 IU/L (normal level, <210 IU/L), total bilirubin of 1.2 mg/dL (normal level, <1.2 mg/dL), γ-guanosine
triphosphate of 17 IU/L (normal level, <73 IU/L), serum creatinine of 1.23 mg/dL (normal level, <1.1 mg/dL), and C-reactive protein of
5.93 mg/dL (normal level, <0.3 mg/dL). Urinary analysis showed 1+ glucose and 3+ bacteria. Arterial blood gas analysis showed respiratory
alkalosis and decreased pCO2 of 25.5 mmHg (normal level, <32 mmHg). These clinical findings fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for systemic
inflammatory response syndrome and sepsis. An abdominal X-ray showed irregular gas accumulation in the right lateral abdomen (Fig. 1).
Computed tomography (CT) indicated stones and gas accumulation in the thickened wall and lumen of the gallbladder. CT also detected
pneumobilia, subserosal gas around the hepatoduodenal ligament, and massive pneumoretroperitoneum behind the ascending mesocolon (Fig. 2). A
diagnosis was difficult to make because we could not exclude the possibility of perforation of the duodenum and large intestine. Thereafter,
emergency surgery was carried out with a diagnosis of both EC and gastrointestinal perforation. Intraoperative findings revealed acute
cholecystitis; the gallbladder wall was destructed with severe inflammation, especially in the neck of the gallbladder. With mobilization of
the right-sided colon and mesocolon, an odor-free foamy abscess was observed along the loose connective tissue of the right retroperitoneum
and extended continuously to the hepatoduodenal ligament and Calot’s triangle (Fig. 3). Unexpectedly, no evidence of perforation was
observed in the stomach, duodenum, or large intestine during surgery. Therefore, we performed cholecystectomy with lavage drainage.
Postoperative management of the infection was performed with administration of meropenem three times of 0.5 g for 10 days. Because
laboratory data fulfilled the criteria of disseminated intravascular coagulation (The revised Japanese Association for Acute Medicine) ,
recombinant human thrombomodulin was administered to improve sepsis-induced disseminated intravascular coagulation for 5 days. He was
medicated with a ventilator because of aspiration pneumonia, and was weaned off ventilatory support by day 5 after surgery. Histological
findings indicated acute cholecystitis with gangrenous change (Fig. 4). Klebsiella pneumoniae was isolated from the culture of the abscess,
and it was considered the cause of EC, pneumobilia, and pneumoretroperitoneum. Eventually, he recovered and was transferred to another
rehabilitation hospital.Fig. 1An abdominal X-ray. In the spine position, an irregular gas image was observed in the right lateral abdomen,
corresponding to pneumoretroperitoneum (arrows)Fig. 2Abdominal CT findings. a: CT showed a thickened wall and intramural air of the
gallbladder, suggesting emphysematous cholecystitis (white arrows). b: Pneumobilia was detected in the intrahepatic bile duct (black
arrows). The gallbladder contained air within the lumen (white arrows). Subserosal free air was detected in the hepatoduodenal ligament and
around the pancreas head (white arrowheads). c: Massive pneumoretroperitoneum was observed behind the right-sided colon (white arrows). d:
Pneumoretroperitoneum extended to the retroperitoneal space behind the ascending mesocolon, bordered by the cecum and iliopsoas muscle
(white arrows)Fig. 3Intraoperative photograph. After mobilization of the right-sided colon, the retroperitoneal space became obvious with an
odor-free foamy abscess along the loose connective tissue of the retroperitoneum (black arrowheads). The gallbladder exhibited acute
gangrenous cholecystitis with a destructed wall. GB: gallbladder, RK: right kidney, A: appendix, RC: right-sided colonFig. 4Microscopic
finding of the resected specimen (H-E staining, ×100). The GB wall exhibited acute suppurative inflammation: hemorrhagic, necrotic changes
with neutrophil infiltration An abdominal X-ray. In the spine position, an irregular gas image was observed in the right lateral abdomen,
corresponding to pneumoretroperitoneum (arrows) Abdominal CT findings. a: CT showed a thickened wall and intramural air of the gallbladder,
suggesting emphysematous cholecystitis (white arrows). b: Pneumobilia was detected in the intrahepatic bile duct (black arrows). The
gallbladder contained air within the lumen (white arrows). Subserosal free air was detected in the hepatoduodenal ligament and around the
pancreas head (white arrowheads). c: Massive pneumoretroperitoneum was observed behind the right-sided colon (white arrows). d:
Pneumoretroperitoneum extended to the retroperitoneal space behind the ascending mesocolon, bordered by the cecum and iliopsoas muscle
(white arrows) Intraoperative photograph. After mobilization of the right-sided colon, the retroperitoneal space became obvious with an
odor-free foamy abscess along the loose connective tissue of the retroperitoneum (black arrowheads). The gallbladder exhibited acute
gangrenous cholecystitis with a destructed wall. GB: gallbladder, RK: right kidney, A: appendix, RC: right-sided colon Microscopic finding
of the resected specimen (H-E staining, ×100). The GB wall exhibited acute suppurative inflammation: hemorrhagic, necrotic changes with
neutrophil infiltration Most ECs occur in patients aged 50 ~ 80 years . Unlike common cholecystitis, the prevalence of EC in males is about
three times that in females . Approximately 50 % of them have diabetes mellitus (DM) and peripheral vascular disease . DM is also well known
as a predisposing factor of gas gangrene , not only in EC but also in emphysematous pancreatitis and emphysematous pyelonephritis . High
glucose level yields a microenvironment which promotes growth of anaerobic bacteria, producing gas under hypoxia of the ischemic tissue in
such diseases . In the present case, the patient had no history of DM, but was complicated by high blood sugar level with elevation of
HbA1c. Under control of the infection by antibiotics and insulin, blood sugar was decreased down to a normal level. Pneumoretroperitoneum in
the present case is considered to have derived from the progression of EC in relation to the diabetic and hypoxic condition of the patient.
In the diagnosis of cholecystitis, ultrasound is indeed available and widely conducted for detection of earlier stage cholecystitis. With
regard to EC, the previous reports indicated that the air in the wall and lumen of the gallbladder interfered in visualization of ultrasound
image with a reverberation artifact . Besides it is difficult to tell whether air was in the lumen or in the wall of the gallbladder. In the
diagnosis of EC, CT is of great help for detection of air with higher sensitivity and specificity compared with other radiological
modalities . A final diagnosis, however, requires the demonstration of an anaerobe in bacterial culture examination. In addition to
anaerobic infection, pneumoretroperitoneum can be caused by gastrointestinal perforation, such as perforation of the duodenal diverticulum
and large intestine . Except for gastrointestinal perforation, emphysematous pancreatitis and emphysematous pyelonephritis are considered as
differential diagnoses of pneumoretroperitoneum. In principle, the distribution of the air presents along the organ of the disease origin on
CT images. As a matter of course, whenever we encounter a patient with acute abdomen, the presence of retroperitoneal air leads to the first
assumption of gastrointestinal perforation. If gastrointestinal perforation is suspected, emergency surgery with open drainage would be
required even for EC with pneumoretroperitoneum. Although we rarely encounter a patient with pneumoretroperitoneum arising from EC, a
definite diagnosis should be made in order to make a determination on emergency surgery. In the present case, we could not exclude
gastrointestinal perforation. If the diagnosis could be made as EC, percutaneous drainage guided by ultrasound or CT would be a treatment
option for both gallbladder and pneumoretroperioneum. However, in the present case, retroperitoneal abscess was spread widely with sponge-
like septum. Thereafter, we should take account of probability that percutaneous drainage resulted in insufficient drainage, if the
retroperitoneal abscess was not localized to a solitary cavity. For elderly high-risk patients, percutaneous drainage would be a treatment
option as a second best alternative . Extra-luminal gas complicated with EC has been conventionally considered to derive from gallbladder
perforation . Whenever presented with EC, pneumoretroperitoneum might occur following gallbladder perforation with anaerobic infection. In
the present case, macroscopic gallbladder perforation was not clarified in intraoperative findings. However, the resected gallbladder
revealed gangrenous cholecystitis with destruction of the wall, which supported the presence of microperforation of the gallbladder or
infectious spread of an anaerobe in the subserosal layer. This theory is supported by cases of pneumoperitoneum without perforation of the
gallbladder in EC. A literature review identified 16 cases of EC with pneumoperitoneum. However, the finding of macroscopic perforation of
the gallbladder was found in only eight cases . Hence, pneumoperitoneum derived from EC may occur regardless of macroscopic gallbladder
perforation. As for pneumoretroperitoneum, Orland et al. reported a case of EC complicated with retroperitoneal gas instead of gallbladder
perforation . Therefore, EC should be considered as a possible cause of pneumoretroperitoneum, even without perforation of the gallbladder.
Pneumoperitoneum and pneumoretroperitoneum as complications, which represent extended infections, seem to be obviously more severe condition
compared with EC localized in the gallbladder. Gill et al. divided EC radiographically into three stages according to the distribution of
air within the gallbladder and/or the biliary system as follows: Stage1 –air in the gallbladder lumen, Stage2 –air in the gallbladder wall,
and Stage3 –air in the pericholecystic tissue . Accordingly, the present case corresponded to the stage3. Some studies have indicated that
the spread of gangrene does not always relate to a poorer prognosis . In the present case, massive gas might have reflected on the
progression of infection because the intraoperative findings showed wide-spreading gangrene of retroperitoneum and the postoperative course
indicated a severe general condition. Therefore, pneumoperitoneum and pneumoretroperitoneum should be regarded as life-threatening and an
extensive infectious form of EC. Further examination of EC is required and the relationship between pneumoretroperitoneum and its prognosis
should be discussed in the future. Progression of EC can cause the spread of gas to the hepatoduodenal ligament or escape into the
peritoneal cavity . From an anatomical viewpoint, retroperitoneum, hepatoduodenal ligament, and pericholecystic tissue are connected by
fascial planes. Such a connection between the pericholecystic tissue and retroperitoneum allows air to escape from the gallbladder when the
gas pressure increases in weak connective tissues, and this may explain the pathway in which cholecystic air, produced due to anaerobic
bacterial infection, reaches the retroperitoneum. Pneumoperitoneum arising from EC itself is very rare. Pneumoretroperitoneum associated
with EC is extremely rare. Previous reports have identified only one case of pneumoretroperitoneum due to EC. However, this case presented a
little subserosal gas around the hepatoduodenal ligament and pancreas head. A large amount of pneumoretroperitoneum complicated with EC has
not yet been reported, except for the present case. EC should be considered as a cause of pneumoretroperitoneum. Whenever we encounter
pneumoretroperitoneum concurrently with EC, it should be assumed that retroperitoneal gas might have derived from gas-producing anaerobic
infection of the gallbladder extending to retroperitoneum. The present case is the first report of massive pneumoretroperitoneum extending
to the dorsal side of the ascending mesocolon as a complication of EC. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Emphysematous cholecystitis Computed tomograph Glycated hemoglobin A1c Diabetes mellitus Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YY edited the manuscript. SS, IT, AY, WF, HK, TF and RI supervised the
whole study. KS provided advice on the pathological findings. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors wish to thank
Yuichi Yoshie, and Hiroki Tatsu (Department of Radiology, Toyama City Hospital) for preparing the radiographic images.
