Noonan syndrome (NS), a heterogeneous developmental disorder associated with variable clinical expression including short stature,
congenital heart defect, unusual pectus deformity and typical facial features, is caused by activating mutations in genes involved in the
RAS-MAPK signaling pathway. Here, we present a clinical and molecular characterization of a small family with Noonan syndrome. Comprehensive
mutation analysis of NF1, PTPN11, SOS1, CBL, BRAF, RAF1, SHOC2, MAP2K2, MAP2K1, SPRED1, NRAS, HRAS and KRAS was performed using targeted
next-generation sequencing. The result revealed a recurrent mutation in NRAS, c.179G > A (p.G60E), in the index patient. This mutation was
inherited from the index patient’s father, who also showed signs of NS. We describe clinical features in this family and review the
literature for genotype-phenotype correlations for NS patients with mutations in NRAS. Neither of affected individuals in this family
presented with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML), which together with previously published results suggest that the risk for NS
individuals with a germline NRAS mutation developing JMML is not different from the proportion seen in other NS cases. Interestingly, 50 %
of NS individuals with an NRAS mutation (including our family) present with lentigines and/or Café-au-lait spots. This demonstrates a
predisposition to hyperpigmented lesions in NRAS-positive NS individuals. In addition, the affected father in our family presented with a
hearing deficit since birth, which together with lentigines are two characteristics of NS with multiple lentigines (previously LEOPARD
syndrome), supporting the difficulties in diagnosing individuals with RASopathies correctly. The clinical and genetic heterogeneity observed
in RASopathies is a challenge for genetic testing. However, next-generation sequencing technology, which allows screening of a large number
of genes simultaneously, will facilitate an early and accurate diagnosis of patients with RASopathies. Noonan syndrome (NS, OMIM 163950) is
a relatively common developmental disorder belonging to the RASopathies, a group of clinically and genetically related syndromes [1, 2]. The
molecular cause underlying RASopathies is dysregulation of the RAS-MAPK pathway and 15 different genes affecting this pathway have been
associated to RASopathies. Of these 15 genes, eleven have been found to be involved in NS or NS-like conditions, where mutations in PTPN11
are the cause of ~50 % of the cases. The other genes are SOS1 [3, 4], CBL , BRAF , RAF1 [9, 10], SHOC2 , MAP2K1 , RIT1 , NRAS , KRAS [15,
16] and RRAS . The main characteristics of NS are short stature, congenital heart defect, unusual pectus deformity and typical facial
features, such as hypertelorism, ptosis, down-slanting palpebral fissures, low-set posteriorly rotated ears and a broad forehead. However,
NS is a clinically variable disorder and additional associated features often present include neonatal failure to thrive, mild mental
retardation, various skin manifestations, bleeding abnormalities and multiple skeletal defects [18, 19]. NRAS is a four-exon gene, encoding
the widely expressed small GTPase NRAS, which act as a membrane-associated molecular switch in the RAS-MAPK pathway . To date, only eight
unrelated individuals with NS and three NS families have been identified with mutations in NRAS [14, 20–23]. Here, we performed a
comprehensive molecular analysis of 13 RASopathy-associated genes; NF1, PTPN11, SOS1, CBL, BRAF, RAF1, SHOC2, MAP2K2, MAP2K1, SPRED1, NRAS,
HRAS and KRAS, in a family with NS, which revealed a previously reported mutation in NRAS, c.179G > A (p.G60E). We describe clinical
features in this family and review the literature for genotype-phenotype correlations for NS patients with mutations in NRAS. Clinical
investigations and genetic analyses were performed according to the guidelines in the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the ethical
committee of Uppsala University and Gothenburg University, Sweden. Informed consent was obtained from all patients and specific permission
was given for photographs. This is a 28-year-old woman, who got the clinical diagnosis of Noonan syndrome (NS) at the age of 4 years because
of growth retardation, cardiomyopathy and facial features. She is the only child of non-related parents. The father (Case 2) has facial
features of NS, but few additional clinical symptoms. She was born to a mother with diabetes during pregnancy with a birth weight of 4.7 kg
(+3 SDS), a length of 52 cm (+1 SDS) and a head circumference of +2 SDS. She also had a large left ventricle, and a systolic murmur, but
this disappeared at the age of six years. Postnatally, her growth decelerated and she had feeding difficulties. At 6.5 years of age, her
height was 104 cm (−2 SDS) and her weight 18.5 kg (−2 SDS). She had low endogenous growth hormone (GH) secretion defined as “partial GH
deficiency”, and started GH therapy within a formal clinical trial (NovoNordisk) from 6.5 years of age. She was treated with GH (dose of
66 μg/kg/day) and responded exceptionally well and treatment was discontinued after two years. However, at 10 years of age, she had her
first pubertal signs and GH-treatment was started again using a standard dose of 33 μg/kg/day. At 12.3 years of age, she had menarche. The
GH-treatment continued until final height (FH) was reached at the age of 14 years. Her FH is 164.5 cm (−0.45 SDS) and weight of 60 kg (+0.3
SDS). Her psychomotor development is normal, but she has slight problems of attention deficit. She attended regular school and works as an
assistant nurse. At the age of 24 years, she has the following features of NS (Fig. 1a): a large skull (62 cm) with a broad forehead,
hypertelorism, down slanted palpebral fissures, bilateral ptosis (especially of her left eye), short and broad neck with a low hairline, and
low-set ears with broad helices. Her hair is normal. She has two large Café-au-lait spots on her back and >50 freckles (lentigines) all over
her body, especially on her back (Fig. 1b) and arms (Fig. 1c).Fig. 1Photograph of the index patient affected by NS with a mutation in NRAS,
p.G60E. a Facial features. b The back with multiple lentigines. c The left arm with multiple lentigines Photograph of the index patient
affected by NS with a mutation in NRAS, p.G60E. a Facial features. b The back with multiple lentigines. c The left arm with multiple
lentigines This is the 62-year-old father of Case 1. He was clinically diagnosed after Case 1 was diagnosed. He has facial features of NS,
but few additional clinical symptoms. Sensorineural hearing impairment was present at birth. His growth pattern was normal, but he had a
delayed puberty. His FH is 175.0 cm (−0.4 SDS) and weight 75 kg (±0 SDS). The intellectual development was normal. He followed normal school
and university education and worked as a librarian until the age of 55 years, when he had to retire because of tinnitus. At the age of
62 years, he has the following features of NS (Fig. 2a–c): slight macrocephaly (61 cm, +2 SDS), bilateral ptosis, hypertelorism and down-
slanting palpebral fissures. He also has curly hair and lentigines on his back. He had a cardiac murmur in childhood that disappeared
spontaneously.Fig. 2Photograph of the affected father with the same NRAS mutation, p.G60E. a Frontal facial features. b Additional facial
features. c The back with multiple lentigines Photograph of the affected father with the same NRAS mutation, p.G60E. a Frontal facial
features. b Additional facial features. c The back with multiple lentigines Genomic DNA from the index patient and her father was extracted
from peripheral blood leukocytes according to standard procedures. The index patient was analyzed for variants in all coding exons and exon-
intron boundaries of NF1 (NM_000267.3), PTPN11 (NM_002834), SOS1 (NM_005633), CBL (NM_005188), BRAF (NM_004333), RAF1 (NM_002880), SHOC2
(NM_007373), MAP2K2 (NM_030662), MAP2K1 (NM_002755), SPRED1 (NM_152594), NRAS (NM_002524), HRAS (NM_005343) and KRAS (NM_004985) using
Agilent HaloPlex Target Enrichment (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA), followed by next-generation sequencing on MiSeq,
Illumina (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Data analysis was performed by NextGENe software v2.3.1 (SoftGenetics, LLC., State College,
PA, USA) and BENCHlab NGS (Cartagenia, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA) [Ekvall et al. Manuscript in preparation]. Variants observed in NRAS exon 2
were verified by bi-directional Sanger sequencing in the index patient and her father. Primer sequences and PCR conditions are available
upon request. DNA sequencing analysis of the index patient (Fig. 1) was performed on 13 RASopathy-associated genes using HaloPlex target
enrichment (Agilent) and next-generation sequencing on MiSeq (Illumina). Coverage and read depth of the RASopathy genes in the index patient
is shown in Table 1. Targeted bases in region of interest (ROI) with >30X read depth was 100 % for all genes, except NF1 (99.8 %) and SOS1
(99.9 %). No complementary Sanger sequencing was performed. A heterozygous missense mutation, c.179G > A; p.G60E, in exon 2 of NRAS was
identified and verified using Sanger sequencing. This mutation was inherited from the father (Fig. 2), who also shows signs of NS. No
additional variants of significance were identified in the index patient.Table 1Average read depth and coverage of RASopathy-associated
genes in this studyGeneReference sequenceROIa basesExonsAverage read depthCoverage >30X (%) BRAF NM_00433330211812 637100. 0 CBL
NM_00518833611612 016100.0 HRAS NM_005343812614 291100.0 KRAS NM_004985768510 811100.0 MAP2K1 NM_00275516221112 525100.0 MAP2K2
NM_03066216431111 127100.0 NF1 NM_000267107375812 72899.8 NRAS NM_002524861716 378100.0 PTPN11 NM_00283465211616 262100.0 RAF1
NM_00288025871615 985100.0 SHOC2 NM_0073732069817 812100.0 SOS1 NM_00563349222313 43999.9 SPRED1 NM_1525941615710 509100.0 a ROI Region of
interest Average read depth and coverage of RASopathy-associated genes in this study a ROI Region of interest To date, only eight unrelated
patients with NS and three NS families have been reported positive for NRAS mutations (p.G13D, p.I24N, p.P24L, p.T50I and p.G60E) [14,
20–23]. In this study, we describe an additional family with NS, where the index patient and her father have c.179G > A (p.G60E). This
mutation has been identified in both sporadic and familial NS patients of European origin [14, 23] and is the most common germline mutation
in NRAS. NS patients with NRAS mutations often show a relatively mild phenotype of typical Noonan facial features. A comparison of
previously reported NRAS-associated NS cases shows that all of the patients present with typical Noonan facial features (14/14) and 11/13
have macrocephaly or relative macrocephaly, but only half of them display congenital heart defects (7/14). All previously reported patients
also show short stature. However, in the family reported here the father’s height was normal, while the daughter had short stature
successfully treated with GH. The majority has pterygium or webbing of the neck (10/12). Thorax deformity (pectus excavatum) occurs in 5/14
patients, while easy bruising is less common (3/14). Half of the males show cryptorchidism (6/10) and ophthalmological problems appear in
4/14 patients. Motor delay is common (9/14 patients) and as previously reported, intellectual development is often mildly delayed (6
patients normal and 8 mildly delayed). Keratosis pilaris/hyperkeratosis is less common (4/12 patients) and hair abnormalities occur in about
half of the patients. Of note, lentigines are observed in six patients, but leukemia/cancer are rarely seen (1 patient with JMML) (Table 2)
[14, 20–23]. Somatic mutations affecting genes in the RAS-MAPK pathway are associated with cancer, and NS and related disorders are known to
cause a predisposition to cancer . Somatic mutations in NRAS are involved in the development of hematological malignancies and in a variety
of solid tumors (COSMIC database; http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/). However, germline NRAS mutations differ from most common somatic NRAS
mutations associated with malignancies and are less activating in dysregulating intracellular signaling .Table 2Clinical features of
patients with Noonan syndrome caused by NRAS mutations#1234567899 M10111212 FPatientDe Filippi et al. Runtuwene et al. Denayer et al.
Denayer et al. Denayer et al. Cirstea et al. Cirstea et al. Cirstea et al. Cirstea et al. Cirstea et al. Kraoua et al. Kraoua et al. Present
studyPresent study NRAS mutationp.G13Dp.I24Np.I24Np.P24Lp.T50Ip.T50Ip.T50Ip.G60Ep.G60Ep.G60Ep.G60Ep.G60Ep.G60Ep.G60EOrigin of mutation de
novo de novo de novo InheritedND de novo de novo de novo InheritedNDND (probably inherited) de novo InheritedND (probably inherited)Paternal
age at conceptionND26 yearsNDNDND50 years34 years31 years47 years44 years45 years47 years34 yearsNDAge at last
examination3 years30 years13 years19 years2.5 years14 years7 years3.3 years20 years50 years24 years3 months28 years62 yearsGenderMaleMaleMaleMaleMaleMaleMaleFemaleMaleFemaleMaleFemaleFemaleMalePrenatal
findingsNDPolyhydramniosNDNDNDNuchal edema, PolyhydramniosPolyhydramniosSingle umbilical artery--PolyhydramniosPyelectasis--Congenital heart
defect---NDCoarctation aortae, Patent foramen ovaleHCMPSMild HCM, Mitral valve dysplasia, PS---PSASD, HCMCardiac murmurRythm disturbanceND-
NDND-SVES--------Typical facial features++++++++++++++Stature5–10th centileMild short<3rd centile10th–25th centile10th–25th centile10th
centilea <3rd centile<3rd centile>10th centile10th centile3rd centile3rd–10th centile50th centilea 50th centileMacrocephalyRelative>90th
centile>97th centileND25th–50th centile+Relative-++RelativeRelative+RelativePterygium colli/Webbed neck-+NDND++-+++++++Thorax deformity-
Pectus excavatumPectus excavatumNDPectus excavatum+-Pectus excavatum++Mildly depressed thoraxPectus excavatum--Easy bruising--
ND+ND-----+ND+-Cryptorchidism-++ND+++NA+NA-NANA-Ophthalmological problemsND-Strabismus, Bilateral keratoconus of the corneaNDNDMyopia---
Myopia--Astigmatis, Myopia, Strabismus-Motor delay/Muscular hypotonia-Motor delayMildNDNDMild++++Mild+--Mental developmentNormalMild
learning difficultiesNormalLearning difficultiesNormalNormalBorderlineSpeech delayNormal-borderlineNormalSpeech delay, dyscalculyNAADHD,
normal IQNormalKeratosis pilaris/HyperkeratosisND-NDNDNDSevere-+++ND---Hair abnormalities--NDNDNDCurly hairCurly hairSparse thin hairCurly
hair--Curly hair-Curly hairLentigines/Café-au-lait spots+Some lentigines--------++++Leukemia/CancerJMML-------------Other-Oligospermia-
Inadequate visio-spatial orientation skills, Inguinal hernia, Delayed pubertal development-Pes equinovarus-Palpebral ptosisIchtyosiform
eczema, Acanthosis nigricans, ScoliosisMother of patient 9Palpebral ptosis, Inguinal hernia, ScoliosisPalpebral ptosis, Unilateral
pyelectasis-Sensory-neural hearing deficit, Father of patient 12 ASD atrial septal defect, HCM hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, JMML juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia, NA not applicable, ND not determined, PS pulmonic stenosis, SVES supraventricular extrasystole aReceived growth
hormone treatment from the age of 8 years, when partial growth hormone deficiency had been noted Clinical features of patients with Noonan
syndrome caused by NRAS mutations ASD atrial septal defect, HCM hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, JMML juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, NA not
applicable, ND not determined, PS pulmonic stenosis, SVES supraventricular extrasystole aReceived growth hormone treatment from the age of
8 years, when partial growth hormone deficiency had been noted In summary, we report an NS family with a p.G60E in NRAS. Neither of affected
individuals presented with JMML. Thus, the proportion of JMML observed in NRAS patients (1/12) is comparable with the observed proportion of
JMML in NS in general . Interestingly, half of the patients (including affected individuals in our family) presented with lentigines and/or
Café-au-lait spots, which is high compared to the prevalence of 3 % for lentigines and 10 % for Café-au-lait spots in the general NS
population . Multiple nevi, lentigines and/or Café-au-lait spots are also detectable in one-third of NS individuals with a RAF1 mutation and
previous studies have demonstrated a higher prevalence of these features in BRAF-positive NS individuals as well. This suggests that NS
individuals with a mutation in NRAS, RAF1 or BRAF have a predisposition to hyperpigmented cutaneous lesions [8, 27]. Of note, the father in
our family presented with congenital sensorineural hearing impairment, which together with lentigines are two common features in Noonan
syndrome with multiple lentigines (NS-ML, previously LEOPARD syndrome). This demonstrates the wide spectrum of phenotypes within each
syndrome as well as the clinical overlap between RASopathies, which makes diagnosis of NS and related disorders challenging. However, by
using the advent of next-generation sequencing technology, which allow for screening of a large number of genes simultaneously, an early and
accurate genetic diagnosis of patients with RASopathies will be facilitated. We have obtained written informed consent from the patients for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available from the Editor of this journal. Noonan
syndrome Mitogen-activated protein kinase Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia Growth hormone Region of interest Catalogue of somatic mutations
in cancer Atrial septal defect Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Not applicable Not determined Pulmonic stenosis Supraventricular extrasystole
Competing interests The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest in connection with this article. Authors’ contributions MLB,
GA and SE conceived the study and participated in its design. GA, JD, OW, EL and AVH performed clinical examination of the patients. SE, MLB
and MW carried out the molecular genetic studies and interpreted the data. SE drafted the manuscript with input from the other co-authors.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was supported by grants from the Swedish Research Council, the Borgström
foundation, the Sävstaholm foundation and foundations at the Medical Faculty of Uppsala University, Sweden. The authors wish to thank the
family for participating in this study.
