While peripheral neuropathy is a common side effect of platinum-based chemotherapy, central nervous system (CNS) toxicity, such as
encephalopathy or seizures, appears to be rare. This manuscript describes the only reported case of nonconvulsive status epilepticus
associated with cisplatin in a cervical cancer patient who does not have other underlying medical conditions. The patient is a 54-year-old
Chinese female with recurrent stage IIIB moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix who was being treated with
cisplatin and topotecan. During the sixth cycle of this regimen, the patient presented with mental status changes. While imaging and
laboratory values were within normal limits, the patient’s EEG revealed nonconvulsive status epilepticus. After appropriate intervention,
she made a complete recovery with no further seizures. The patient currently remains on antiepileptic therapy, but is no longer receiving
cisplatin. Patients who present with new onset seizures should primarily be evaluated for underlying medical conditions. Among patients who
are suspected to have CNS side effects associated with platinum use, we recommend avoidance of platinum agents in future chemotherapeutic
regimens. Although rare, providers should be aware of the potential for CNS toxicity associated with this drug class. Platinum analogs are
chemotherapeutic agents used to treat a wide variety of malignancies. Members of this drug class commonly prescribed for gynecologic
malignancies include cisplatin and carboplatin. These medications work by covalently binding to DNA to produce intrastrand and interstrand
crosslinks. The formation of these DNA adducts leads to inhibition of transcription and replication, as well as cell-cycle arrest . The most
common side effects associated with platinum agents are nephrotoxicity, myelosuppression, nausea and vomiting, and hypersensitivity
reactions. Neurotoxicity is also reported, though the frequency varies widely among the drugs in this class. While up to 60 % of patients
receiving cisplatin have neurotoxicity, only 4-5 % of patients who receive carboplatin experience this side effect . Peripheral neuropathy
is the most common neurological toxicity associated with platinum agents. Patients with platinum-induced peripheral neuropathy can
experience paresthesia in a “glove and stocking” distribution, loss of vibratory sensation, and loss of proprioception that can severely
affect activities of daily living and quality of life. Ototoxicity, in the form of hearing loss or tinnitus, is also a well-described
neurological side effect associated with cisplatin. Encephalopathy, transient blindness, aphasia, and seizures are reported to be associated
with platinum use, but appear to be exceedingly rare in the absence of brain pathology, laboratory abnormalities, or medication overdose .
In this paper, we report a case of status epilepticus associated with cisplatin in a patient with recurrent cervical carcinoma. The patient
is a 54-year-old female with recurrent stage IIIB moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Patient had no relevant
prior medical or family history. Her initial treatment included one cycle of oxaliplatin and tegafur followed by intensity-modulated
radiotherapy (IMRT) and vaginal brachytherapy. At completion of her radiation, the patient received five cycles of taxane and platinum-based
chemotherapy with a complete response. She remained without evidence of disease for two years, when she was diagnosed with a recurrence in
her retroperitoneal and thoracic lymph nodes. Oxaliplatin and paclitaxel were initiated, but discontinued after one cycle due to vague
“mental status changes.” She underwent brain imaging at that time that was within normal limits. She was then treated with radiation to the
retroperitoneal lymph nodes followed by immunotherapy with dendritic cell and cytokine-induced killer cell transfusions resulting in a
partial response. The patient was then initiated on an oral taxane for two cycles with persistent disease. She then presented to our
institution and was dispositioned to topotecan (0.75 mg/m2) daily on cycle days one, two, and three and cisplatin (50 mg/m2) on cycle day 1,
administered every three weeks. The patient tolerated the first five cycles without incident and achieved an objective tumor response.
However, on day two of cycle six, she developed altered mental status and was not responding appropriately to questions or commands. She was
brought to the emergency room where vital signs and laboratory values, including complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, and
urinalysis, were within normal limits. Neurological examination revealed no focal deficits. She underwent CT and MRI of the brain, which
were also within normal limits. However, electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed the presence of nonconvulsive seizures (NCS). She was given a
one-time dose of lorazepam with significant improvement in her mental status. The patient was also initiated on levetiracetam. A repeat EEG
three days later noted resolution of the seizure activity. After this episode, the patient was transitioned to topotecan and bevacizumab
with no further seizures to date. Please reference Table 1 for timeline of events.Table 1Timeline of eventsDateKey EventJuly 2011Diagnosis
of Cervical CancerAugust 2011 – January 2012Primary Treatment-oxaliplatin/tegafur-IMRT/brachytherapy-Paclitaxel/platinumJanuary
2013Recurrence of diseaseJanuary 2013 – October 2013Treatment for Recurrence-oxaliplatin/paclitaxel- tumor-directed radiation- dendritic
cell immunotherapy- taxane therapyOctober 2013Progression of disease/consultation at MD Anderson Cancer CenterOctober 2013Initiation of
topotecan/cisplatinOctober 2013 – January 2014Cycles #1–5 of topotecan/cisplatinFebruary 2014Cycle #6 of topotecan/cisplatinSEIZURE ACTIVITY
Timeline of events This case describes the unusual presentation of a patient in nonconvulsive status epilepticus attributed to cisplatin
use. As the patient had normal laboratory and imaging findings without convulsions, the diagnosis was somewhat more challenging.
Interestingly, the patient reported a history of vague mental status changes with platinum use in the past. On further questioning, it
appears that her symptoms at that time were very similar to her current presentation. However, she did not undergo EEG evaluation or further
neurological work-up. While central nervous system (CNS) disorders are not frequently associated with platinum use, cases have been reported
. Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is the most commonly described platinum-associated CNS toxicity in the literature .
PRES can occur in a wide variety of clinical settings, including eclampsia, sepsis, autoimmune disease, and medication-related toxicity.
Symptoms of PRES typically involve headache, visual changes, seizures, and encephalopathy. PRES is diagnosed by clinical presentation as
well as brain MRI, where white matter edema of the posterior cerebral hemispheres is typically seen. When PRES is associated with platinum
drugs, symptoms have been reported to occur within a few hours of cisplatin administration and typically resolve in a few days . Several
authors have described the presence of seizures after platinum administration not attributable to PRES, including two cases of status
epilepticus . However, almost all of these patients had laboratory derangements such as hypomagnesemia or renal insufficiency, or imaging
abnormalities such as brain metastases, which could lower the seizure threshold. In the absence of other medical factors that could
potentiate them, seizures associated with platinum chemotherapy appear to be exceedingly rare. This manuscript describes the only reported
case of nonconvulsive status epilepticus related to cisplatin use in a cervical cancer patient without other underlying medical conditions.
The etiology of platinum-induced CNS toxicity is unknown, though heavy metal toxicity or demylinization have been proposed . Overdose of
platinum agents can certainly also cause these disorders. However, reports have noted CNS toxicity with these drugs at a wide range of doses
and in combination with various chemotherapeutic agents. As platinum agents do not typically cross the blood-brain barrier, patients should
be protected from most CNS side effects at doses in the therapeutic range. It is unclear why this is not true for all patients. In
conclusion, CNS toxicity appears to be a rare but serious side effect of administration of platinum-containing drugs. Patients who present
with CNS symptoms should primarily be evaluated for other underlying medical conditions. However, if platinum-based chemotherapy is
suspected as the etiology, we suggest the use of alternative chemotherapeutic regimens in the future. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor of this journal. Central nervous system Electroencephalogram Intensity-modulated radiotherapy Nonconvulsive seizures Posterior
reversible encephalopathy syndrome Competing interests The authors have no conflicts of interest to report. Authors’ contributions LLH
participated in the conception and coordination of the report and drafted the manuscript. YR aided with coordination of the report and
helped to draft the manuscript. SNW participated in the conception of the report, coordinated the report, and helped to draft the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was supported by funds from an NIH T32 CA101642 to LLH and an NIH
K12 Calabresi Scholar Award (K12 CA088084) to SNW.
