Agenesis of the internal carotid artery (ICA) is a rare congenital abnormality, sporadically reported to be associated with a combined
congenital hypopituitarism. Nevertheless, only a few cases have been extensively described, and none of these have been characterized by an
isolated growth hormone (GH) deficiency. Here, we describe a 17-year old boy referred to our hospital for fatigue, decreased muscle strength
and severe headache reported after the cessation of rhGH treatment for a GH deficiency diagnosed at the age of 2 years and 3 months.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an adenohypophyseal hypoplasia with a lack of posterior pituitary hyperintensity, whereas MRI
angiography indicated the absence of a normal flow void in the left ICA. Endocrinological tests confirmed the GH deficiency (GH peak after
growth-hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) + arginine: 2.42 ng/mL) with a very low IGF-I value (31 ng/mL) and normal function of other
pituitary axes. To the best of our knowledge this is the first confirmed case of an isolated GH deficiency in a patient with ICA agenesis.
The presence of an isolated pituitary deficit is unlike to be considered only as an effect of hemodynamic mechanism, suggesting a role for
genetic factor(s) as a common cause of these two rare birth defects. Further studies could clarify this issue and the underlying mechanisms
to better understand the etiopathogenetic characteristics of this disorder. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12902-015-0037-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Agenesis, aplasia and hypoplasia of
the internal carotid artery (ICA) are rare congenital vascular malformations . Of these, agenesis of the ICA is an extremely rare vascular
anomaly occurring in less than 0.01 % of the population . A 3:1 left side predominance in the ICA agenesis has been reported . Agenesis of
the ICA is rarely associated with congenital hypopituitarism (CH) . CH is also a very rare congenital manifestation presenting either as an
isolated hormone deficiency—the most common of which is isolated growth hormone deficiency (IGHD)—or multiple pituitary hormone involvement
(combined pituitary hormone deficiencies (CPHD)) . The etiology of this association is not clear: even if the blocking of a unilateral blood
supply might cause the pituitary hypoplasia, a possible genetic cause, such as complex neural crest differentiation and/or migration
disorders, cannot be excluded. To the best of our knowledge, no more than 12 cases of CPHD associated with ICA have been reported [2, 5–14]
(Table 1). However, a case of transient IGHD has been also described even though it may be caused by a reduced flow because of a focal
stenosis in the right distal internal carotid artery and right middle cerebral artery due to a moyamoya . Given the rarity of these two
conditions, the association is unlikely to be causal, although this possibility cannot be excluded. In this report, we describe for the
first time a 17-year-old boy with a confirmed diagnosis of IGHD and we review the literature and discuss the etiology of this association.
The patient was a 17-year-old boy on rhGH therapy for 14 years because of a GH deficiency that was diagnosed at the age of 2 years and
3 months. Therapy was stopped 9 months before the beginning of symptoms—fatigue, decreased muscle strength and severe headache. However, the
patient had not come for retesting one month after discontinuation of rhGH treatment. The propositus was the first child of non-
consanguineous Italian parents. The mother was in treatment for post-partum depression. The maternal grandfather was in treatment for
autoimmune hyperthyroidism. The mother’s height was 152 cm and she had menarche at the age of 13; the father’s height was 168 cm and he had
a normal development. The target height was 166.0 ± 6.0 cm (−1.70 SDS). All auxological data were normalized for chronological age by
conversion to standard deviation scores (SDS) that were calculated according to the following formula: patient value - mean of age-related
reference value/standard deviation of the age-related reference value . The child was born at 40 weeks of gestation with an uncomplicated
delivery. The birth weight was 2970 g (−1.15 SDS), length at birth was 50 cm (−0.30 SDS), and his occipito-frontal head circumference (OFC)
was 34 cm (−0.61 SDS). He had neonatal jaundice requiring phototherapy. The child’s neuromotor development was normal: he sat at 6 months,
walked independently at 12 months, and began to use language at 14 months. At 6 months, the patient exhibited very deficient growth (Fig. 1a
and b). At 2 years and 3 months, he was admitted to our Paediatric Endocrine Unit for an endocrinological evaluation. His height, evaluated
according the growth charts compiled by Cacciari et al. , was 78.6 cm (−2.79 SDS). His weight was 9.830 kg (−2.78 SDS), and his BMI was
15.91 (−0.28 SDS) (Fig. 1a-d). Extensive biochemical, endocrinological and metabolic examinations did not reveal any abnormalities with the
exception of plasma concentrations of IGF-I and IGFBP-3 that were low for his age and sex: 27 ng/mL and 1.38 μg/mL, respectively. Thus, GH
stimulation tests were performed and showed a reduced response after the clonidine (GH peak of 5.2 ng/mL) and insulin (glucose nadir
2.0 mmol/L at 30 min; GH peak of 3.9 ng/mL) tests. This revealed a GH deficiency (GHD). Bone age was assessed according to the Greulich and
Pyle method , and it was delayed (1 year and 2 months versus a chronological age of 2 years and 3 months). Brain MRI of the hypophyseal
region showed the presence of a pituitary hypoplasia (height 1.8 mm and width 2.7 mm). Consequently, hGH therapy (0.22 mg/kg/wk) was
started.Fig. 1Length (a), weight (b), height (c) and body mass index (BMI; d) growth charts of the patient. The growth charts of the length
and weight refer to the first 3 years 4 months of life. The arrows indicate the age at which growth hormone treatment was initiated (black
arrow). The length and the weight were evaluated according the growth charts compiled by de Onis et al. . The height and BMI were evaluated
according the growth charts compiled by Cacciari et al. Length (a), weight (b), height (c) and body mass index (BMI; d) growth charts of the
patient. The growth charts of the length and weight refer to the first 3 years 4 months of life. The arrows indicate the age at which growth
hormone treatment was initiated (black arrow). The length and the weight were evaluated according the growth charts compiled by de Onis et
al. . The height and BMI were evaluated according the growth charts compiled by Cacciari et al. The child responded very well to rhGH
treatment (Fig. 1c) and at 3 years and 4 months old, his height was 94.5 cm (−1.14 SDS), weight 12.450 kg (−2.10 SDS), height velocity
15.06 cm/yr (5.05 SDS), and BMI 13.94 (−1.75 SDS). At 4 years and 3 months old, his height was 101.9 cm (−0.82 SDS), his weight was
15.300 kg (−1.24 SDS), his height velocity was 8.05 cm/yr (1.12 SDS), and his BMI was 14.73 (−0.82 SDS). The onset of puberty occurred at
12 years old with normal onset, timing, tempo, and magnitude of pubertal changes . He stopped rhGH treatment at 16 years and 3 months old
when he reached the definitive stature : his height was 170.8 cm (−0.64 SDS) and his weight was 51.800 kg (−1.56 SDS) with a BMI of 17.76
(−1.63 SDS) (Fig. 1c and d). At 17 years old, his GH secretion was re-tested by the growth-hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) + arginine test,
which is a reliable test of ITT in retesting patients who had undergone GH treatment in childhood . The test confirmed a severe GH
deficiency (basal GH value of 0.18 ng/mL; GH peak of 2.42 ng/mL). MRI angiography was performed because of the severe growth hormone
deficiency (GHD) and headache; it confirmed the presence of adenohypophyseal hypoplasia (height 2.5 mm and width 3.5 mm) with a lack of
posterior pituitary hyperintensity. The MRI angiography also showed the absence of a normal flow void in the left ICA (Fig. 2).Fig. 2A MRI
angiography time-of-flight (TOF) three-dimensional (3D) technique through the circle of Willis revealed agenesis of the intracranial portion
of the left internal carotid artery (ICA). a. 3D TOF in the axial plane at the carotid siphon level shows agenesis of the left ICA. b. 3D
TOF in the axial plane for the vertebrobasilar system shows the left vertebral artery and the compensatory hypertrophy. c. MRI angiography
maximum intensity projection (MIP) reconstruction in the axial plane reveals agenesis of the intracranial portion of the left ICA. d. MRI
angiography MIP reconstruction in the coronal plane highlights hypertrophy in the left vertebral collateral blood flow. e. Sagittal T1W TSE
sequence shows adenohypophyseal hypoplasia (height 2.5 mm and width 3.5 mm) with a lack of posterior pituitary hyperintensity A MRI
angiography time-of-flight (TOF) three-dimensional (3D) technique through the circle of Willis revealed agenesis of the intracranial portion
of the left internal carotid artery (ICA). a. 3D TOF in the axial plane at the carotid siphon level shows agenesis of the left ICA. b. 3D
TOF in the axial plane for the vertebrobasilar system shows the left vertebral artery and the compensatory hypertrophy. c. MRI angiography
maximum intensity projection (MIP) reconstruction in the axial plane reveals agenesis of the intracranial portion of the left ICA. d. MRI
angiography MIP reconstruction in the coronal plane highlights hypertrophy in the left vertebral collateral blood flow. e. Sagittal T1W TSE
sequence shows adenohypophyseal hypoplasia (height 2.5 mm and width 3.5 mm) with a lack of posterior pituitary hyperintensity No abnormal
findings were noted in the electrocardiogram. Chromosomal studies of the peripheral lymphocyte cultures revealed a 46,XY normal male
karyotype. An array of CGH analyses on the patient’s DNA was performed with an Agilent 60 K array platform with a resolution of
approximately 100 kb. No genomic imbalances were detected. A complete examination was performed with particular attention to neurology,
metabolism, and endocrinology (Table 2). The only abnormal result was a very low IGF-I value (31 ng/mL). In light of these results, the
patient restarted rhGH therapy, and his symptoms at the time of referral disappeared.Table 1Review of endocrinological and anatomical
characteristics of patients with congenital hypopituitarism and internal carotid malformationsSexAgePituitary MRIInternal carotid RMIOther
characteristicsMolecular studiesReferences1NNNot specified (except for normal posterior pituitary).Absence of ICA and carotid canal.Not
specified.NP2M18 mPituitary hypoplasia.Anomaly of right ICA.TSH, GH, ACTH deficiency. Central diabetes insipidus. Possible
hypogonadism.NP3F5 mAbsence of anterior pituitary and ectopic pituitary posterior lobe.Absence of right common carotid artery, right ICA,
right anterior cerebral artery.TSH, ACTH and GH deficiency. No evidence of diabetes insipidus. Genitalia were normal. Single central
maxillary incisor.NP4M23 yearAbsence of anterior pituitary and ectopic pituitary posterior lobe.Absence of right ICA and carotid canal and
A1 segment of the right anterior cerebral artery.Congenital microphthalmia with cataract and coloboma of the right eye, encephalocele.
Hormonal substitution treatments not specified.NP5M37 yearAbsence of anterior pituitary.Hypoplasia of right ICA and carotid canal.Amblyopia
of the left eye caused by an optic nerve coloboma, encephalocele. Hormonal substitution treatments not specified.NP6F29 yearPituitary
hypoplasia and ectopic pituitary posterior lobe.Absence of right ICA, carotid canal, and A1 segment of the right anterior cerebral
artery.TSH, ACTH, and GH deficiency. No evidence of diabetes insipidus. Hypogonadism. Chiari I malformation with
syringomyelia.NP7M5 yearAbsence of anterior pituitary and ectopic pituitary posterior lobe.Absence of left ICA and carotid canal, A1 segment
of the left anterior cerebral artery and the anterior communicating artery.Retrognathia, microphallus, and cryptorchidism. TSH, ACTH, GH
deficiency, but no evidence of diabetes insipidus. Possibile hypogonadism.NP8M11 yearPituitary hypoplasiaAbsence of left ICA and carotid
canal; hypoplasia of A1 segment of left anterior cerebral arteryTSH, ACTH, GH deficiency. Central diabetes insipidus. Microphallus with
possible hypogonadism.NP9F10 yearHypoplastic anterior pituitary, flat sella turcica, absent pituitary stalkAgenesis of the left ICA and the
left carotid canalGH, TSH, gonadotropin deficiency. No evidence of diabetes insipidus. Born out of a consanguineous marriage.No HESX1, LHX4,
OTX2 mutations10F7 monthAdenohypophyseal hypoplasia with a lack of posterior pituitary hyperintensityAbsence of the left ICADesaturation
episodes, recurrent respiratory infections. Short hands and feet. GH, ACTH and TSH deficiency.17q24.2 deletion11F2 yearAdenohypophyseal
hypoplasia with a lack of posterior pituitary hyperintensityAbsence of the right ICAGH, TSH, and gonadotropin deficiency. No clinical
evidence of diabetes insipidus.NP12M3 weekAbsence of anterior pituitary with ectopic posterior pituitaryAbsence of the left ICA and carotid
canalGH, TSH, ACTH and gonadotropin deficiency. Microphallus.NP13M17 yearAdenohypophyseal hypoplasia with a lack of posterior pituitary
hyperintensityAgenesis of the left ICAGH deficiency. No other pituitary deficiencies. No clinical evidence of diabetes insipidus.Normal
array-CGHOur case NP not performedTable 2Laboratory results at left ICA agenesis diagnosisValueReference valuesValueReference valuesFreeT4,
pmol/L12.410.3–19.4HbA1c, %4.4<5.5TSH, mIU/L1.200.40–4.0Na+, mEq/L138135–145Cortisol, μg/dL16.85.0–19.0K+, mEq/L4.23.5–5.0ACTH,
ng/L25.79.0–52.0Cl−, mEq/L10195–105Prolactin, mIU/L27187.0–392.0Plasma osmolality, mOsm/kg295280–300Total testosterone,
ng/mL378270.0–1070.0Urine Osmolality, mOsm/kg1037400–1100 TSH thyroid-stimulating hormone, ACTH adrenocorticotrophic hormone Review of
endocrinological and anatomical characteristics of patients with congenital hypopituitarism and internal carotid malformations NP not
performed Laboratory results at left ICA agenesis diagnosis TSH thyroid-stimulating hormone, ACTH adrenocorticotrophic hormone ICA agenesis
is a rare congenital abnormality that is very rarely associated with CH. All reported cases refer to patients with CPHD and ICA agenesis
although many of these reports did not describe—or only poorly described—the possible associated endocrinological abnormalities and
treatments. This had led many to hypothesize a vascular cause of pituitary disorders. Two different theories involving the hemodynamic
mechanisms or disorders of differentiation and/or migration of the neural crest have been reported . The ICA originates from the third
aortic arch during embryogenesis. However, it is controversial whether the common and external carotids really originate from the same third
aortic arch or from the aortic sac . In patients presenting a vascular anomaly of the ICA, the blood supply of the affected side is
partially or completely compensated by the vertebrobasilar or contralateral ICA system. This is characterized by the enlargement of a
normally existing segment or presence of abnormal or persisting fetal arteries . In most patients, this vascular anomaly is asymptomatic ,
and the rarity of a pediatric ICA agenesis diagnosis suggests that the arterial collateral pathways are initially sufficient to support
cerebral perfusion . However, some patients may experience recurrent headaches, blurred vision, hemiparesis, and hypopituitarism [25, 26]
likely due to cerebrovascular insufficiency, compression by collateral vessels, or associated cerebral aneurysms . Moreover, the symptoms
reported by our patient were probably the result of both GHD (fatigue, decreased muscle strength, etc.) and ICA agenesis (headache). Only
one of the 13 patients previously described in the literature had MRI evidence of associated vascular defects. This patient had transient GH
deficiency and was described by Quah et al. . This patient’s pituitary defects and neurological symptoms may have been caused by reduced
flow due to a focal stenosis of the other distal internal carotid artery and right middle cerebral artery due to a moyamoya . However, the
presence of a defect in the vascular perfusion is difficult to reconcile with the pituitary anatomical abnormalities and with the
variability of the endocrinological defects reported including isolated GH deficiency or central diabetes insipidus (described only rarely)
[6, 15]. The ICA is formed in embryos during the fourth week from the third aortic arch arteries and during the fifth and sixth weeks from
the terminal segments of the dorsal aorta . Conversely, the pituitary gland fully develops due to merging of the Rathke pouch and the
infundibulum by the eighth week of gestation. The blood supply of the anterior and posterior pituitary gland comes from the bilateral
superior and inferior hypophyseal arteries arising from the ICA . It is not clear why pituitary hypoplasia would result from blocking of a
unilateral blood supply and from abnormalities of the hypophyseal anatomy such as adenohypophysis hypoplasia and aplasia. However, the
presence of ectopic neurophypophysis, which has been described in some patients, or other hypophyseal abnormalities, may also suggest a
genetic etiology. Pituitary gland development and function depend on the sequential temporal and spatial expression of multiple
transcription factor genes such as POU1F1 (POU class 1 homeobox 1; OMIM 173110), PROP1 (prophet of PIT1; OMIM 601538), HESX1 (homeobox gene
expressed in ES cells; OMIM 601802), LHX3 (LIM homeobox gene 3; OMIM 600577), LHX4 (LIM homeobox gene 4; OMIM 602146), SOX3 (SRY-related
HMG-box gene 3; OMIM 313430), and OTX2 (orthodenticle homolog 2; OMIM 600037) . However, these defects may cause a deficiency in one or more
pituitary hormones. Its clinical features vary in both severity and time of presentation, and onset may occur in the neonatal period or
develop later in life . In some patients, the hormonal deficiencies may present as a part of a syndrome with patients manifesting
abnormalities in structures that share a common embryological origin with the pituitary gland . In our review 6 patients, in addition to
our, had a pituitary hypoplasia [3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13]. This abnormality was isolated in two cases [6, 13], associated with ectopic
neurohypophysis , absent pituitary stalk , or associated with a lack of posterior pituitary hyperintensity [3, 11]. However 5 patients had
an absent adenohypophysis [5, 7, 10, 12] and 4 associated of these showed an ectopic neurohypophysis [5, 7, 10, 12]. Moreover, ectopic
neurohypophysis may be accompanied by midline brain defects supporting an embryological defect due to genetic factors [32, 33]. This has
been reported in idiopathic GH deficiency or in subjects with HESX1, LHX4, and SOX3 gene mutations . For example, both the SOX3 under- and
over-expression may result in CPHD or IGHD in males, associated with infundibular hypoplasia, ectopic/undescended posterior pituitary, and
abnormalities of the corpus callosum . In these patients, congenital abnormalities of the ICA or other vessels have not been reported .
However, the associated midline anomalies (coloboma, single central maxillary tooth, transsphenoidal encephalocele, and Chiari I
malformation) reported in some cases [5, 7, 9, 15] may support this hypothesis. Of the patients in our review, one case had unilateral
agenesis of the internal carotid artery associated with CPHD without HESX1, LHX4, or OTX2 mutations . Moreover, Savasta et al. recently
reported a CNV (copy number variant) i.e. a paternally inherited 200-kb deletion in 17q24.2. Thus, we performed array-CGH in our patient,
but discovered no genomic imbalances. However, we indicate the need for further molecular analysis by NGS techniques to discover possible
molecular abnormalities associated with this syndrome. Given the rarity of the two conditions, the association is unlikely to be causal,
although this cannot be excluded . So, we hypothesize that an unknown gene mutation is the most likely explanation for the anatomical
defects seen in these patients, suggesting a role for genetic factor(s) as a common cause of these two birth defects. Here were report the
first case of a confirmed isolated GH deficiency in a patient with ICA agenesis. Our experience suggests the opportunity to carefully
evaluate possible vascular abnormalities in case of IGHD or CPHD. The presence of an isolated pituitary deficit, and the rare association
between the two conditions, suggest a genetic rather than a hemodynamic mechanism. Further studies, especially with NGS-based molecular
analysis, could clarify this issue and the underlying mechanisms to better understand the etiopathogenetic characteristics of this disorder.
Parents of the patient provided written informed consent for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor of this Journal. Additional file 1: CARE guidelines checklist of our Case Report.
(DOCX 14 kb) CARE guidelines checklist of our Case Report. (DOCX 14 kb) Adrenocorticotrophic hormone Congenital hypopituitarism Combined
pituitary hormone deficiencies Growth hormone Growth hormone deficiency Growth-hormone-releasing hormone Internal carotid artery Isolated
growth hormone deficiency Magnetic resonance image Thyroid-stimulating hormone Competing interests Stefano Stagi (SStagi), Giovanna
Traficante (GT), Elisabetta Lapi (EL), Marilena Pantaleo (MP), Sabrina Becciani (SB), Marzia Mortilla (MM), Salvatore Seminara (SSeminara)
and Maurizio de Martino (MdM) have no financial interests to disclose and no conflict of interest to declare. Authors’ contributions SStagi
carried out the endocrinological evaluation, conceived of the study, and participated in its design. GT performed the clinical genetic
evaluation, conceived of the study, and participated in its design. EL performed the clinical genetic evaluation, and revised critically the
manuscript. MP performed the molecular genetic studies, participated in the acquisition of data, and was involved in drafting the
manuscript. SB performed the endocrinological evaluation, participated in the acquisition of data, and was involved in drafting the
manuscript. MM performed the neuroradiological evaluation, was involved in drafting, and revised critically the manuscript. SSeminara
performed the endocrinological evaluation and revised critically the manuscript. MdM participated in the endocrinological evaluation and
participated in its coordination. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to thank the patient’s family.
