Heterotopic gastric mucosa (HGM) of the esophagus is a congenital anomaly consisting of ectopic gastric mucosa. It may be connected with
disorders of the upper gastrointestinal tract, exacerbated by Helicobacter pylori. The diagnosis of HGM is confirmed via endoscopy with
biopsy. Histopathology provides the definitive diagnosis by demonstrating gastric mucosa adjacent to normal esophageal mucosa. HGM located
in the distal esophagus needs differentiation from Barrett's esophagus. Barrett's esophagus is a well-known premalignant injury for
adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. Malignant progression of HGM occurs in a stepwise pattern, following the
metaplasia–dysplasia–adenocarcinoma sequence. We present a rare case of a teenage girl with HGM located in the distal esophagus, associated
with chronic gastritis and biliary duodenogastric reflux. Endoscopy combined with biopsies is a mandatory method in clinical evaluation of
metaplastic and nonmetaplastic changes within HGM of the esophagus. Heterotopic gastric mucosa (HGM) of the esophagus was first defined in
1805 by Schmit during a postmortem examination.1 HGM of the esophagus is mostly localized in the upper esophagus and termed inlet patch.2 An
inlet patch is a congenital anomaly and most of these are largely asymptomatic. It usually cannot be diagnosed easily. Rarely, it can also
be found in other parts of the esophagus.3,4 HGM is reported in up to 10% of the general population among numerous reports and epidemiologic
studies which have been essentially performed in adult population.5 Pediatric data are still limited. There are case reports showing that
this injury may play a role in the development of stenosis, ulcer, perforation, or esophagotracheal fistula related to its capability of
hydrochloric acid secretion.6,7 Malignant progression of HGM occurs in a stepwise pattern, following the metaplasia–dysplasia–adenocarcinoma
sequence.8,9 These complications may be exacerbated by Helicobacter pylori.10 We present a case of esophageal gastric heterotopia that was
located in the distal esophagus and needed differentiation from Barrett's esophagus. A Caucasian teenage girl, 16 years old, followed up for
the last 3 years, was initially admitted in the V-th Pediatric Gastroenterology Clinic of “St Mary” Children's Emergency Hospital, Iasi,
Romania, for postprandial epigastric pain. Over the 3 years, her physical examination revealed good generally status, abdominal pain
localized in the left hypochondrium and/or in epigastrium, without any other pathological elements at examination. The informed consent was
obtained each time the patient was hospitalized. Laboratory tests: complete blood count showed normal results. The upper gastrointestinal
endoscopy revealed the presence of multiple pseudo-polypoid formations with slightly eroded tip, measuring approximately 0.5 cm, in the
lower 1/3 of esophagus (Fig. 1A, B); stomach with hypertrophic folds, with nodular purpuric congestion and erosions covered with hematic
deposit in the antral region, sero-mucous fluid stasis of bile (Fig. 2), duodenum with diffuse congestion without ulceration, friable
mucosa. (A) Gastric heterotopia in the distal part of esophagus; (B) gastric heterotopia in the distal part of esophagus. Nodular purpuric
gastritis with hypertrophic folds; biliary reflux. Histopathologic examination of the biopsy samples taken from the pseudo-polypoid
formations showed acid-secreting, oxyntic-type, glandular, gastric epithelium, attached to the esophageal epithelium, without intestinal
metaplasia or dysplasia. There were a few microhemorrhagic outbreaks and a discrete inflammatory infiltrate (Fig. 3A, B, C). Our
histopathologic examination did not show intestinal metaplasia or Goblet cells (Alcian blue stain), which are important for the diagnosis of
Barrett's esophagus. Five biopsy samples were taken, 3 from inlet patches which revealed gastric epithelium and 2 down (distal) from these
injuries where squamous epithelium was found. These inlet patches were clearly separated from the stomach by squamous epithelium. The test
was negative for H. pylori. Histopathologic examination (histopathologic examination × 100): A—gastric epithelium attached to the esophageal
epithelium. B—inflammation and microhemorrhages in the esophageal epithelium. C—inflammation and microhemorrhages in the gastric epithelium.
At colonoscopy, the mucosa of rectum, sigmoid and descending colon appeared normal, without evidence of diverticulosis or polyps. HGM is a
congenital defect that is usually no >1 cm. HGM can be <1 cm or >5 cm.11 The inlet patch is considered an inherited anomaly. Inlet patches
represent the incomplete transformation from columnar to squamous epithelium during embryonic development.12 The process is starting from
the middle third of the esophagus and extending proximally and distally. The last esophageal segment reepithelialized is the most proximal.
HGM develops on incomplete reepithelialization. The persisting columnar cells at birth are usually proximally over the upper third of the
esophagus or, much less frequently, distally over the esophagogastric junction. The preferential localization of HGM in the cervical
esophagus is explained by the temporal difference in the stratified reepithelialization of both ends of the esophagus.13 It is generally
accepted that Barrett's esophagus is an acquired metaplastic change because of chronic gastroesophageal reflux. Another proposed theory on
the development of HGM involves metaplastic transformation of the squamous lining to columnar from chronic acid injury as seen in Barrett's
esophagus.14 These are based on similarities in the mucin and staining characteristics with CK7 and CK20 between Barrett's esophagus and
HGM.15 It is postulated that chronic acid exposure results in inflammation that leads to reactivation or proliferation of remnant columnar
mucosa. These remnants of columnar mucosa are present as microscopic foci in the esophageal lining or are covered by squamous mucosa. With
chronic irritations, these foci develop into larger patch resulting in the formation of island of columnar mucosa, HGM.16 It was also
proposed that the origins of HGM may be different, congenital in children and acquired in adult.15 There are several factors that favor the
congenital origin hypothesis. The embryogenesis of esophagus can explain the profiles of HGM, proximal location or the distal part of the
esophagus. The children do not have sufficient duration of acid exposure to induce changes suggested by the acquired theory. The origin of
esophageal HGM has not been finally determined as yet, and further investigations are needed to resolve these questions.3 But from current
available evidence, it seems more likely that HGM is congenital in origin. Most inlet patches are solitary and extend longitudinally. In the
patients with multiple patches, they tend to be small.17 In our case, we have described them as multiple pseudo-polypoid formations with
slightly eroded tip. Most inlet patches are clinically asymptomatic.18 The underlying factor of the symptoms, clinical findings, and
complications is the secretion of acid. Only in 10% of cases they do produce clinical symptoms, such as chest and throat pain, dysphagia,
globus sensation, shortness of breath, chronic cough and hoarseness.19 In our case, the patient presented with postprandial epigastric pain
only. In our patient, HGM was associated with discrete inflammation, chronic gastritis, and biliary duodenogastric reflux. The HGM was grade
I according to the proposed clinicopathologic classification (Table 1).3 Clinicopathologic Classification of Esophageal HGM Ectopic gastric
mucosa can occur anywhere along the gastrointestinal tract. For this reason, we performed the colonoscopy which was normal. Barrett's
esophagus is characterized histologically by an admixture of 3 columnar epithelia: cardiac, oxyntocardiac, and intestinal metaplasia.
Histologically, HGM consists of oxyntic mucosa with mucus-secreting columnar cells, chief cells, and parietal cells.3 Barrett's esophagus is
widely considered to be a consequence of longstanding acid induced injury commencing as an erosive esophagitis and progressing over years to
columnar and intestinal metaplasia of the squamous epithelium. In our case, the patient had biliary duodenogastric reflux, without
esophagitis. It needed a histopathologic confirmation, that is the presence of intestinal metaplasia.20 Our histopathologic examination
revealed just a discrete inflammatory infiltrate, without intestinal metaplasia or dysplasia. In Barrett's esophagus, columnar epithelium
extends from the stomach up to the gastroesophageal junction into the esophagus.20 It looks like a continuation of gastric mucosa. In our
case, columnar epithelium was not the continuation of gastric mucosa; it was clearly separated from the stomach by squamous epithelium.
There were multiple pseudo-polypoid formations, which can indicate that all lesions are congenital and not reflux related as in Barrett's
esophagus. Furthermore, over the last 3 years as we have followed up the patient, the injuries have remained the same in number and
pathology. Based on studies from the literature, we reevaluated the findings in our patient as gastric heterotopia and not Barrett's
esophagus. A strong affinity of H. pylori to colonize gastric type mucosa has been demonstrated.21 In our case, colonization of HGM and of
stomach with H. pylori was not observed. This type of gastric heterotopia can cause reflux-like symptoms, which resolved very well with
proton pump inhibitor treatment.22 No treatment is required for asymptomatic HGM. Strictures are treated with serial dilatation and should
be biopsied to rule out malignancy. It can be discussed about an ablation of the gastric heterotopia's area. We did not try it because of
the lack of support in the literature. The cyclooxygenase (COX) enzyme catalyzes the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins.23
There are 2 COX isoforms in humans: COX-1 and COX-2. Overexpression of COX-2 has numerous effects on cells: increased cell proliferation,
decreased apoptosis rate, stimulation of angiogenesis, and increased invasive and metastatic potential.24,25 Neoplastic transformation in
gastric heterotopia is rare. In contrast to Barrett's esophagus, gastric heterotopia has not been accepted as a premalignant lesion.3 COX-2
is overexpressed in Barrett's esophagus and is involved in the sequence of events that lead to malignant transformation.26 We are following
the evolution by endoscopy every 6 months and multiple esophageal biopsies once a year in order to monitor any change in HGMs. We are
presenting a case with multiple pseudo-polypoid formations of gastric heterotopia that are located in the distal part of the esophagus. HGM
should not be overlooked in the diagnostics. Endoscopy combined with histopathologic and microbiological analysis of biopsies is definitely
a mandatory method in clinical evaluation of metaplastic and nonmetaplastic changes within HGM of the esophagus. When, during superior
digestive endoscopy, columnar-lined esophagus is observed in the distal esophagus, not being in continuity with gastric mucosa, the
diagnosis of HGM must be thought and confirmed histologically by the presence of pure oxyntic mucosa. Abbreviations: CK = cytokeratin, COX =
cyclooxygenase, HGM = heterotopic gastric mucosa. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
