Methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) is a nuclear protein highly expressed in neurons that is involved in transcriptional modulation and
chromatin remodeling. Mutations in MECP2 in females are associated with Rett syndrome, a neurological disorder characterized by a normal
neonatal period, followed by the arrest of development and regression of acquired skills. Although it was initially thought that MECP2
pathogenic mutations in males were not compatible with life, starting from 1999 about 60 male patients have been identified and their
phenotype varies from severe neonatal encephalopathy to mild intellectual disability. Targeted Next Generation Sequencing of a panel of
intellectual disability related genes was performed on two unrelated male patients, and two missense variants in MECP2 were identified
(p.Gly185Val and p.Arg167Trp). These variants lie outside the canonical MBD and TRD domains, where the pathogenicity of missense variants is
more difficult to establish. In both families, variants were found in all affected siblings and were inherited from the asymptomatic mother,
showing skewed X-chromosome inactivation. We report here the first missense variant located in AT-hook domain 1 and we underline the
importance of MECP2 substitutions outside the canonical MeCP2 domains in X-linked intellectual disability. MECP2 mutations in females are
associated with Rett Syndrome (RTT, MIM 312750)1, a severe neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a normal perinatal clinical course
(up to the age of 7-18 months), followed by an arrest of development and subsequent deterioration of language skills and purposeful use of
the hands, known as regression stage2. In this stage, patients show for the first time seizures and typical stereotypic hand movements, with
a reduction in interpersonal contact2. Since RTT affects almost exclusively girls3 (with an estimated incidence of 1 in 10,000 - 15,000
female newborns), it was previously thought to result from an X-linked dominant mutation with lethality in hemizygous males2. In 2001, it
was demonstrated that MECP2 mutations are almost exclusively of paternal origin, explaining the rareness of affected males4. Since 1999
about 60 cases of MECP2 mutated males have been reported5 (http://mecp2.chw.edu.au/). Many of these cases are mosaic or 47,XXY karyotype
males showing RTT features6,7. Germline MECP2 mutations found in karyotypically normal males were proved to cause a wide spectrum of
phenotypes, ranging from severe encephalopathy (children usually die at birth or in the first year of life)8 to X-linked intellectual
disability (XLID) or autism5. In these latter cases, MECP2 variants are not found in RTT females and include only substitutions, even
outside the canonical domains, or C-terminal deletions5. This makes it harder to assess the pathogenicity of these variants and some of them
turned out to be rare non-pathogenic variants or are still classified of “unknown significance”5,9. MeCP2 has two well-characterized
functional domains: the methyl-CpG-binding domain (MBD) that can bind selectively to DNA at symmetrically methylated CpGs10 and the
transcription repression domain (TRD)11. DNA methylation is the major modification of eukaryote genomes and, in vertebrates, this occurs
predominantly at position 5′ of CpGs12, resulting in gene silencing13. MeCP2 is involved in transcriptional repression in many ways: it
interacts by its TRD domain with the corepressor Sin3A and the histone deacetylase complex, recruiting them to the methylated CpG sites14;
it binds through the TRD domain to the co-repressors c-Ski and N-CoR and forms complexes independently from its interaction with Sin3A15; it
can also interact with transcription factor IIB, a key component of the basal transcriptional machinery16. Nevertheless, MeCP2 was proved
not to bind to the majority of promoter regions with the highest methylation levels and, conversely, the majority of the bound promoters
lies within transcriptionally active genes17. It is therefore more correct to consider MeCP2 as a transcriptional regulator, rather than
simply a repressor. There is also a conserved region in the C-terminal portion of the protein (C-terminal domain). It is involved in binding
both to naked DNA and to the nucleosome core18 and it is considered important since many pathogenic MECP2 mutations occur in this region19.
More recently, two conserved clusters of the protein have been characterized: AT-hook 1 and AT-hook 2, from amino acid 185 to 197 and 265 to
277, respectively20 (www.uniprot.org, ID: P51608). AT-hooks are highly conserved regions among species and play a very important role in DNA
binding of non-histone, chromatin-associated proteins of the high-mobility group AT-hook (HMGA), in which they were first described21. No
pathogenic missense variants have been reported so far in AT-hook 1 cluster. In the present study, Targeted Next Generation Sequencing of a
panel of intellectual disability related genes was performed on two unrelated male patients, and two non synonymous variants in MECP2
outside the canonical MBD and TRD domains were identified (p.Gly185Val and p.Arg167Trp). Data supporting pathogenicity of these variants and
detailed clinical description of the families are provided, helping to better characterize the spectrum of MECP2 mutations in males. The
technical process to enrich, amplify and sequence the exonic parts of the 565 ID-related candidate or known selected genes, as well as
bioinformatic procedures for data analysis, have already been described22. To assess the pathogenicity of the variants, several
bioinformatics tools were consulted. PhyloP (http://compgen.bscb.cornell.edu/phast)23 evaluates the phylogenetic conservation of a specific
nucleotide, using multiple sequence alignment. The tool assigns a positive value to conserved positions among species and negative scores to
those with high substitution rates, ranging from +6.94 to −3.69. SIFT (http://sift.jcvi.org/) is a tool that, on the basis of the
conservation of the wild type amino acid, classifies non synonymous variants as tolerated or deleterious, depending on the effect on the
protein function24. PolyPhen-2 (http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/) predicts damaging effects of missense substitutions (in terms of
structure and function), performing physical and phylogenetic analysis. This tool describes a variant quantitatively (giving a score between
0 and 1) and qualitatively (benign, possibly damaging or probably damaging)25. Mutation Taster (http://www.mutationtaster.org/) can assess
the pathogenicity of all kinds of variants, giving as output four kinds of results: “predicted disease causing”, “predicted polymorphism”,
“known disease causing” or “known polymorphism”26. We also checked for the presence of the variants in the NCBI Short Genetic Variations
database (dbSNP142, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/), Exome Aggregation Consortium dataset (http://exac.broadinstitute.org) and an exome in
house dataset (100 Italian controls). Sanger sequencing was performed to confirm the presence of the variants in the index cases and
segregation analysis was carried out in all the available family members. DNA was amplified by PCR, using appropriate primer pairs (Forward:
5′-TTTGTCAGAGCGTTGTCACC-3′; Reverse: 5′-CTTCCCAGGACTTTTCTCCA-3′) and conditions. PCR products were then analyzed using an ABI PRISM 3130
Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). In order to assess whether the non-manifestation of the phenotype in the
carrier mothers could be caused by unbalanced X-chromosome inactivation pattern, the X inactivation status was analyzed exploiting a highly
polymorphic trinucleotide repeat located in the androgen-receptor gene27. DNA extracted from lymphocytes was digested overnight with HhaI
enzyme that digests the unmethylated, active X chromosome. Digested and undigested DNA was amplified using fluorescent primers for androgen-
receptor gene polymorphic region and the products were then separated using an ABI PRISM 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA, USA). Gene Mapper software (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) was used to perform a comparison of allele areas ratio of
undigested and digested DNA. The MeCP2 amino acid sequence (P51608) was retrieved from UniProt Database (http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/).
By using Protein Model Portal (PMP) web server28, we obtained homology model of the region (amino acids 66-200) with the template structure
PDB ID 1UB1 . The last part of this region, the AT-hook 1 motif (185-197), was afterwards modelled with the template PDB ID 2EZE and then
the model was refined by energy minimization with GROMACS v 4.6.7 software29. The DUET 30 and mCSM31 programs were used to predict the
possible effect of amino acids substitutions on the protein structure and function. These latter approaches are novel machine-learning
algorithms that use the three dimensional structure in order to quantitatively predict the effects of nucleotide changes on protein
stability and protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid affinities. Using targeted next-generation sequencing of 565 known or candidate ID-
associated genes, two MECP2 variants (NM_004992.3) located outside the canonical MBD and TRD domains have been identified in two unrelated
males showing ID (figure 1). The clinical and molecular features of these patients are detailed below. In the first family (figure 1A) there
are two affected brothers. They were the sole offspring of healthy and unrelated parents, born after full-term and uneventful pregnancies.
The older patient (figure 2, panel A) is six years old. At birth his weight was 3.650 Kg (90th percentile) and the length was 51 cm
(75th-90th percentile), OFC (Occipital Frontal Circumference) was not available. Delivery and neonatal period were unremarkable. He started
babbling at 14 months and said his first words when he was 16 months old; independent walking was acquired at 17 months; sphincter control
was achieved at 4 years. At 18 months, a global development regression was noticed with loss of the acquired spoken language, impaired
social interaction and appearance of motor stereotypies such as hand flapping and body rocking. At the age of six he presents learning
disability with absent speech and autistic spectrum disorder. Seizures are not reported. Laboratory test revealed occasional
microhaematuria. Karyotype, molecular analysis for Fragile X syndrome and Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) array results were normal.
Auxological parameters are in the normal range and he does not show peculiar facial features. The younger brother (figure 2, panel B) is
four years old. His auxological parameters at birth were: weight 3.560 Kg (90th percentile) and length 50 cm (75th-90th percentile), OFC was
not available. He started to say his first words when he was 10 months old; he acquired independent walking at 14 months of age and
sphincter control when he was three. Similarly to his brother, he experienced a regression of acquired language and social skills at 18
months. Differently from the proband, he does not show stereotypies. Microhaematuria is not present yet. In the second family there are
three affected brothers (figure 1B). They were all born at term by Caesarean section after uneventful pregnancies. For each of them, a delay
in language development and learning disabilities are reported, without regression. Seizures are not observed in any of them. The eldest
brother (figure 2, panel C) is 42 years old. He presently shows severe ID (mental age of about 4 years) and impaired social interaction. The
language is limited to simple phrases. The behavior is characterized by apathy, anxiety, hypochondria, shyness, obsessive demand for food
and hypersomnia. He also suffers from mild to moderate pulmonary hypertension. Neurological examination, CT (computed tomography) of the
brain and EEG (electroencephalogram) resulted normal. Physical examination showed short stature (<3rd percentile), obesity (BMI, Body Mass
Index, 30.1), macrocephaly (OFC at 98th percentile), downturned nasal tip with wide pinnae, short philtrum, anteverted ears and large hands.
The second affected brother (figure 2, panel D) is 41 years old and shows moderate ID (mental age of about 8 years), poor language and
behavioral problems such as aggressiveness, low frustration tolerance, episodes of inappropriate laughter and apathy, obsessive demand for
food and hypersomnia. Neurological examination was normal. At physical examination he exhibited short stature (<6th percentile), obesity
(BMI 31.9), OFC at 60th percentile and craniofacial features with high forehead, downturned nasal tip with wide pinnae, short philtrum, thin
lips, posteriorly rotated ears and large hands. The younger one (figure 2, panel E) is 32 years old and shows severe ID (mental age of about
5 years), language limited to simple sentences, social impairments, unmotivated laughter, apathy, obsessive demand for food and hypersomnia.
In addition, he suffers from high myopia and was treated for keratoconus. Neurological examination, CT of the brain and EEG did not show
pathological signs. He presents short stature (8th percentile), obesity (BMI 32.1), macrocephaly (OFC at 98th percentile), and the same
facial appearance with the additional feature of cleft right ear lobe. The two younger siblings (one female and one male) are healthy and
intellectually normal. Parents are fourth degree cousins; the father died of cancer, while the mother is still alive and healthy. She shows
normal intelligence without neurological disorders. The screening for pathogenic variants, performed using a custom panel, led to the
identification of the c.554G>T (p.Gly185Val) substitution in exon 4 of MECP2 in the proband of family 1 (#188). The variant lies outside the
two canonical functional domains of the protein (MBD and TRD) in a conserved cluster that ranges from amino acid 185 to amino acid 197,
named AT-hook domain 1 (AT-hook 1). The substitution has not been reported neither in dbSNP142, nor in Exome Aggregatium Consortium, nor in
internal exome database. The nucleotide is conserved (phyloP score: 4.16) and according to the bioinformatics analysis, the variant is
predicted to be deleterious (SIFT, score: 0), disease causing (Mutation Taster, p-value: 1) and probably damaging (PolyPhen-2, score:
0.999). In the proband of family 2 (#177), the c.499C>T (p.Arg167Trp) substitution in exon 4 of MECP2 was identified. The variant is located
in the MBD/TRD inter-domain area, outside any known domain. The substitution is reported in dbsnp142 (rs61748420) with unavailable frequency
and it is not described in Exome Aggregation Consortium or in internal exome database. The nucleotide is conserved (phyloP score: 3.92) and
bioinformatics analysis indicates the variant as deleterious (SIFT, score: 0), disease causing (Mutation Taster, p-value: 1) and probably
damaging (PolyPhen-2, score: 1). The c.554G>T (p.Gly185Val) substitution was found in both affected brothers in hemizygous state and in the
healthy mother in heterozygous state (figure 1A). All the affected male brothers from family 2 (#177) were hemizygous for the c.499C>T
(p.Arg167Trp) variant, while the healthy sister and the healthy brother did not carry it. The mother showed the substitution in heterozygous
state (figure 1B). In order to assess if the absence of a clinical phenotype in the two carrier mothers could be due to an unbalanced X
chromosome inactivation (XCI) pattern, the XCI analysis was performed on DNA extracted from lymphocytes. In the mother of the first family
(#188), carrying the c.554G>T (p.Gly185Val) variant, the XCI status resulted moderately unbalanced (76:24). The mother of family 2 (#177),
that is healthy carrier of the c.499C>T (p.Arg167Trp) substitution, had a skewed (16:84) X-chromosome inactivation pattern. The PMP web
server 28 was used to obtain the molecular model of wild type (figure 3A and 3B) and mutated sequence (figure 3C and 3D) of MeCP2 for both
ISOFORM_A (NM_004992.3) and ISOFORM_B (NM_001110792.1). Actually the two obtained models were structurally identical since the two isoforms
are different only in the N-terminal region that has no effect in remaining protein folding. The prediction programs (DUET 30and mCSM 31)
indicated a pathogenic effect for both variants (table 1). In particular, the p.Arg167Trp variant was predicted to have a destabilizing
effect on protein structure (negative ΔΔG value). For the other variant (p.Gly185Val), in addition to an effect on protein stability, a
destabilizing affinity change (negative ΔΔG value) in protein-DNA interaction was predicted, in accordance with the localization inside an
AT-hook1 (185-197) motif. Mutations in the MECP2 gene, located on the X chromosome, are mainly associated in females to Rett syndrome (both
the classic form and the milder Z-RTT variant)32. Males with MECP2 mutations can show a broader range of clinical presentations, ranging
from severe phenotypes (congenital encephalopathy or Rett syndrome) to milder ones (ID or autism)5 (figure 4). MECP2 mutations in males are
mainly located in the two canonical functional domains of the protein: the Methyl-CpG Binding Domain (MBD, amino acids 78-162)33 and the
Transcriptional Repression Domain (TRD, amino acids 207-310)34 (figure 4). Rare reported mutations are localized in the connecting peptide
between MBD and TRD or in the C-terminal portion of the protein5 (figure 4). In the present study, we report the identification of MECP2
missense variants (p.Gly185Val and p.Arg167Trp) outside the canonical domains of the protein in two families with ID (figure 1). Variants
are present only in affected siblings and healthy mothers are carriers in both families (figure 1). Maternal X-chromosome inactivation
resulted skewed in both cases. Bioinformatic analysis indicates the affected nucleotides as conserved (PhyloP) and all the predictive tools
employed (SIFT, PolyPhen-2, Mutation Taster) strongly support the pathogenicity of the two variants. Computational analysis after modelling
of wild-type and mutated protein suggested a pathogenic effect for both variants, in terms of structure stability (p.Arg167Trp and
p.Gly185Val) and protein-DNA affinity change (p.Gly185Val) (figure 3) (table 1). Variants are not present neither in international control
reference groups such as the Exome Aggregation Consortium dataset (http://exac.broadinstitute.org) nor in an exome in house dataset (100
Italian individuals). The variant p.Gly185Val (family 1) has never been reported in the literature, although a frameshift at this position
is described35, and lies in one of the conserved high mobility group (HMG)-like AT hook motifs of MeCP2: AT-hook 1 (amino acids 185-197).
These motifs were first identified in HMG chromatin proteins and recognize the minor groove of AT-rich DNA21. The MeCP2 AT-hook 2 motif
(amino acids 265-277) has been recently demonstrated to be crucial for chromatin shaping and DNA binding in whole RTT mouse brain20. The
maintenance of this cluster in MeCP2-G273X mice has been considered the cause of the observed milder phenotype (late onset and longer
survival) respect to MeCP2-G270X mice, highlighting these three residues as capable of determining the clinical course of the disease20.
Differently, very little is known about the AT-hook 1 motif and to date it is considered of unknown significance20. The identification of
the first MECP2 missense mutation in the AT-hook 1 motif strongly suggests that this cluster may also have an important role for MeCP2
function. The p.Arg167Trp variant is located in the MBD/TRD connecting peptide (figure 4, panel C), outside any known functional or
predicted domain. Until now, the variant has been considered of unknown pathogenicity since it was identified in a single family with
ID5,36. However, the identification of another ID family with the same MECP2 variant segregating with the disease strongly argues in favor
of its pathogenicity. The family reported by Couvert et al. is a large three-generation family with four males with non-specific ID (age
range: 25-50 years)36. In common with the three affected boys reported in the present study (age range: 32-42), male patients presented with
moderate to severe ID and obesity32. However, differently from the family reported by Couvert and colleagues, our patients do not show
resting tremors. Since mutation type or X-chromosome inactivation cannot be implicated in determining this phenotypic variability, modifier
genes elsewhere in the genome probably may play an important role. To our knowledge, about 60 males mutated in MECP2 have been reported so
far5 (http://mecp2.chw.edu.au/). Non-mosaic, karyotypically normal males with MECP2 point mutations can be divided in three groups with
decreasing phenotypic severity: 1) Males with neonatal encephalopathy and early death whose mutations are also found in females with RTT
(figure 4, panel A); 2) Males with RTT or RTT-like phenotype whose mutations can be found in females with variable phenotypes, ranging from
RTT to non-specific ID (figure 4, panel B); 3) Males with ID whose mutations are not found in females with RTT but in females with milder
phenotypes (figure 4, panel C). In the first group, mutations are mainly represented by early truncating ones or substitutions in MBD or TRD
(figure 4, panel A). Differently, patients from the second and the third group bear missense changes also located in the C-terminal region
or late truncating mutations (figure 4, panel B and C). The third group is the only one that includes missense changes in the MBD/TRD
connecting peptide (figure 4, panel C). Besides early truncating mutations whose pathogenicity is not questionable, the clinical
interpretation of late truncating or missense changes outside the canonical domains is challenging and some of these changes turned out to
be non-pathogenic variants, suggesting to proceed with caution37. Segregation with disease in the family argues in favor of a pathogenic
significance but it can not exclude a casual association. Given the rareness of these cases, the identification of additional families with
the same MECP2 variant and a comparable phenotype is fundamental to assess pathogenicity, as in the case of the variant p.Arg167Trp reported
in the present study. As for the second variant, the localization in a predicted functional motif (AT-hook 1) suggests its functional
importance and alerts for the identification of additional cases with changes disrupting these specific residues. The absence of both
variants in control population of the same ethnic origin is also a crucial factor supporting pathogenicity and it should be always
considered in a diagnostic setting. In conclusion, this paper reports the identification of missense mutations outside the two crucial
functional domains of MeCP2 protein in two new families with ID. These mutations lie in the “gray area” connecting the MBD and the TRD
domains, where interpretation of missense variant pathogenicity is more difficult and raises important issues in genetic counseling. MECP2
mutations in this region are not present in severe phenotypes (neonatal encephalopathy or RTT) but are found only in patients with ID of
different degrees and additional symptoms in some cases (figure 4). In this paper, we describe in detail the clinical picture of the
affected males, expanding the spectrum of phenotypes associated to MECP2 mutations. Finally, this study reports for the first time a MECP2
missense mutation in the AT-hook 1 motif of the protein, pointing to its possible functional importance as already demonstrated for the AT-
hook 2 motif20. The Cell lines and DNA bank of Rett Syndrome, X-linked mental retardation and other genetic diseases, member of the Telethon
Network of Genetic Biobanks (project no. GTB12001), funded by Telethon Italy, and of the EuroBioBank network, provided us with specimens.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors have no financial or personal relations that could pose conflict of interest. Three generation pedigree of
family 1 (A) and family 2 (B). The genotype at the MECP2 locus is indicated below tested individuals: +/y = hemizygous male; +/− =
heterozygous female; −/− = absence of variant in female; −/y = absence of variant in male. Black symbols represent affected individuals,
white symbols indicate healthy individuals and white symbols with black dots represent healthy female carriers. In panel A, the small black
circle indicates a spontaneous abortion occurred at the 6th week of pregnancy. Pictures of male patients with MECP2 missense variants. Upper
panels show photographs of the two affected siblings of family 1 (#188): the older one is 6 years old (A), the younger one is 4 years old
(B). Note the absence of peculiar facial features. Lower panels show photographs of the three patients of family 2 (#177) at the age of 42
years (C), 41 years (D) and 32 years (E), demonstrating similar phenotype with high forehead, downturned nasal tip with wide pinnae, short
philtrum, thin lips, truncal obesity and large hands. In panel C, patient also presents cleft lobe of the left ear. Cartoon representation
of homology model of the 66E-200K MeCP2 domain obtained by Protein Model Portal. The wild type structured model of the protein is
represented with the amino acid Arg167 (panel A) and the amino acid Gly185 (panel B) highlighted. Panels C and D show the mutated protein
for p.Arg167Trp and p.Gly185Val variants, respectively. MECP2 mutations reported in males and associated phenotypes. In each panel (A, B and
C) a schematic representation of the MeCp2 protein is shown. Above protein structure, mutations found in males are indicated (Panel A:
neonatal encephalopathy; Panel B: Rett spectrum phenotype; Panel C: ID/autism); below protein structure, the same mutations identified in
females are reported. The phenotypes are represented as follows: neonatal encephalopathy in dark grey, Rett phenotype spectrum in light
grey, ID in white and autism in striped boxes. Variants described in this paper are highlighted with hatching (panel C). Predicted stability
change (ΔΔG) after a single mutation using DUET and mCSM programs. Negative values indicate destabilizing effect.
