Retiform hemangioendothelioma (RH) is a rare low-grade variant of angiosarcoma mostly reported on dermis or subcutaneously. A 30-year-old
woman suffering from dry cough, dyspnea and pleural effusion has been described. Distinctive symptoms and lesions on high resolution
computed tomography (HRCT) scan and common histological, immunological feature are discussed. Diagnosis was made by thoracoscopy as RH. RH
is known as a rare kind of low-grade malignant angiosarcoma with high rate of local recurrence and low potential of metastasis which is a
sparsely distributed disease counting 35 cases (Table 1) whereas none of them is related to pleura or lung . Given the lacking information
of pleural RH, its clinical manifestation, HRCT presentation and thoracoscopic appearance of a female patient are presented. The definitive
diagnosis was made due to pathological observation and immunochemical staining. The prognosis is unpredictable since the tumor can affect
multiple organs . Unfortunately, consensus has not been reached on if there is effective treatment to this tumor.Table 1Summary of clinical
features of reported RH casesAuthor (N)Age/GenderSiteImmunochemistryMetastasisTreatmentSurvivalCalonje (15)9–78/9 F,6 M6:lower
limbsND1/15NDND4:upper limbs3:Trunk1:Penis1:ScalpFukunaga (1)75/FLower limbCD31, vimentin, UEA-1 (all), CD34, f-VIII (part)0/1NDNDDuke
(1)30/FUpper limb, trunkCD31, f-VIII0/1Excision>10 yearsSamz-Trelles (1)11/MLower limbVimentin, f-VIII0/1Excision>4 yearsSchommer
(1)73/FTrunkCD31,UEA-1, f-VIII0/1Excision, RT, IT>1 yearDarouti (1)32/FLower limbf-VIIINDND>1.5 yearsTan (1)19/FLower
limbND0/1Excision>14 monthsIoannidon (1)55/FUpper limbCD310/1Excision>4 yearsParson (1)17–71/4 F,0 M1:upper
limbCD31(4/4),NDNDND1:trunkD2-40(1/4),1:headVEGFR3(0/4)1:lower limbBhutoria (1)35/FTrunkNDLymph nodeExcisionNDEmberger
(1)17/MTrunkCD31,D2-400/1Excision>3 yearsZhang (1)61/FHeadCD34, f-VIII, vimentin0/1Excision(twice)6 monthsAydıngöz (1)60/FLower
limbND0/1Excision>2 yearsHirsh (1)44/MTrunkCD310/1Resection,chemoradiation>36 monthsKeiler (1)11/FUpper limbND0/1ExcisionNDO’Duffy
(1)18/MHeadNDLymph nodeExcision, RTNDAlbertini(1)6/FTrunkD2-40LungExcision6 monthsChoi (1)20/MUpper limbf-VIIINDExcisionNDCouceiro
(1)50/FUpper limbNDNDExcision>4 yearsMota (1)26/FTrunkCD31, D2-40NDExcisionNDAl-Faky9/FHeadCD31, CD34, D2-40, f-VIIINDExcision>6 years ND
not documented, M male, F female, UEA-1 ulex europaeus agglutinin 1, f-VIII factor VIII-related antigen, RT radiotherapy, IT immunotherapy
Summary of clinical features of reported RH cases ND not documented, M male, F female, UEA-1 ulex europaeus agglutinin 1, f-VIII factor
VIII-related antigen, RT radiotherapy, IT immunotherapy A 30-year-old female patient was admitted to pulmonary department because of dyspnea
and dry cough denying chest pain, hemoptysis, fever, weight loss or other systemic symptoms. Her symptoms were stable and had not been given
any medication prior to admission. Her chest X-ray by local hospital showed pleural effusion on the right side. She received modified
radical mastectomy in 2006 removing a breast mass on her right chest. The biopsy confirmed a diagnosis of poorly-differentiated invasive
ductal carcinoma with axillary lymph nodes metastasis therefore the patient received adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Her father died
of liver cancer. The rest of her personal history, social history and the review of systems were unremarkable. Decreased vocal fremitus and
dullness of percussion on her right thorax were detected in physical examination. No enlarged superficial lymph nodes were palpated and
laboratory tests revealed normal level of carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA). Her ultrasonic examination of abdomen and pelvis cavity alarmed
no metastatic signs. The patient’s HRCT results showed merely pleural effusion on the right side (Fig. 1). No residual mass, enlarged lymph
nodes of hilar or lesion on pleura were observed. Laboratory tests of her pleural effusion samples contained erythrocytes and leukocytes and
it was exudates. Furthermore, cytological examination reported large amount of lymphocytes without atypical or carcinomatous cells.
Scattered greyish variously sized nodes were discovered on costal pleura in thoracoscopy. The lesion presented themselves as exophytic
masses surrounded by indistinctive borders with a tendency to fuse together. Pulmonary and diaphragmatic pleura were free from infiltration.
Rechecking of chest X-ray complied with her former HRCT scan.Fig. 1HRCT scan of the patient before thoracoscopy. Small amount of unilateral
pleural effusion was detected on the right side of the patient. None visible pleural nodes were reported. (Opacity showed in the patient’s
right lung which has been proved to be bacterial infection because it disappeared after treatment of antibiotics) HRCT scan of the patient
before thoracoscopy. Small amount of unilateral pleural effusion was detected on the right side of the patient. None visible pleural nodes
were reported. (Opacity showed in the patient’s right lung which has been proved to be bacterial infection because it disappeared after
treatment of antibiotics) Histological and immunological examination of biopsy specimen pictured disarranged, jagged, blood vessels of thin
walls and slit-like fissures were prevailing. At higher magnification the vessels’ walls were lined with highly nuclei/cytoplasm ratioed
endothelial cells with minimal cytological atypia and mitosis. Atypical cells protruding into lumina mimicking “hobnail” appearance or
endothelial papillae was absent as well as their invasion into adjacent tissues. Infiltration of lymphocytes was also rare (Fig. 2).
Combined with immunohistochemical staining positive for CD31, CD34, D2-40 (Fig. 3) and negative for CrebB-2, GCDFP-15, CEA, CA15-3, S-100,
Ki-67 and myogenin, which confirmed the diagnosis and ruled out the possibility of breast cancer and other diagnosis, a diagnosis of RH was
established.Fig. 2Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the patient’s sample. Hematoxylin and eosin staining presented atypical cells forming
disarranged and abnormal lumina. Some of the “vessels” were complete and contained erythrocytes and main part of the tumor consisted of
zigzag slits. No atypia or mitosis of nuclei showed in the cells meanwhile cytoplasm was insufficientFig. 3Immunohistochemical staining of
the patient’s sample. Immunohistochemical staining for D2-40 expression was positive Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the patient’s sample.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining presented atypical cells forming disarranged and abnormal lumina. Some of the “vessels” were complete and
contained erythrocytes and main part of the tumor consisted of zigzag slits. No atypia or mitosis of nuclei showed in the cells
meanwhile cytoplasm was insufficient Immunohistochemical staining of the patient’s sample. Immunohistochemical staining for D2-40 expression
was positive According to our knowledge and clinical experience, endostatin was recommended for treatment. The patient revisited 6 months
later with relieved symptoms when her HRCT showed diminished and encapsulated pleural effusion after receiving symptomatic treatment and
passed away at home in 2013. Hemangioendothelioma (HE), an intermediate lesion between hemangioma and angiosarcoma, has been incipiently
delineated as a kind of vascular tumor highlighted by its marginal biological features . It generally appears on skin or in soft tissues and
extensively includes HE of epithelioid, kaposiform, retiform, composite and pseudomyogenic (also known as epithelioid sarcoma-like HE)
subgroups and papillary intralymphatic angioendothelioma (also known as Dabska tumor). Malignancy of pseudomyogenic HE has recently been re-
recognized . Definitive diagnosis of varied types of this tumor is based on histopathlological morphology and immunohistochemical markers .
HE on pleura are limitedly documented as majority of them have been confirmed as epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EH). Though EH favorably
links to lung and pleura according to published cases, there has never been a description of its counterpart-retiform hemangioendothelioma
on pleura. Retiform hemangioendothelioma is a low-grade variant angiosarcoma which has been first introduced by Calonje in 1994 .
Hyperchromatic nuclei without mitosis suggests its intermediate characters and indicates discrepant prognosis. RH demonstrates a
predilection for female adults . The majority of RH cases have been described as lesions on trunk or limbs whereas penis and scalp were
occasionally involved . Features of RH’s lesion vary among individual patients expressing as masses, which is hyperhidrotic, or erosion [8,
10, 11]. Exophytic pattern seems to be more prevailing . All the lesions in this patient were surrounded by “poor circumscription” as a
presentation of its histological character. Histological diagnosis lays the foundation of clinical diagnosis also plays the key role in
differentiating RH from angiosarcoma and other subtypes of hemangioendothelioma. RH comprises of blood vessels ”weaving a net” by
infiltrating into bundles of collagen. Endothelial cells fashion intraluminal papillea with scarce cytoplasm [8, 12]. However, pathological
sample in this case for histological examination may accidentally be a single component of “composite hemangioendothelioma” which contains
retiform HE, epithelioid HE, angiosarcoma, spindle cell hemangioma, lymphangioma, arteriovenous malformation or part of these. This
assumption is drawn from the fact that excision of gross sample has not be performed taking the fact that EH tends to form in lung into
consideration . Histochemical markers of RH include CD31, D2-40, CD34, factor VIII-related antigen [15, 16] among which CD34, factor VIII-
related antigen have been consistently reported. CD34 and CD31 symbolize endothelial lineage and D2-40 expresses on other kinds of lymphatic
hemangioendothelioma or hemangioma [17, 18]. Controversy, nevertheless, has been aroused by Amy Parson's demonstration of 3 negative cases
of D2-40 in 4 RH patients . Though histological and clinical features permits differential diagnosis between RH and other vascular tumors ,
it shares a number of similarities with hobnail hemangioma which has been considered as it benign counterpart. However, hobnail hemangioma
features shortage of papillae protruding into lumina and restricted location while prominent lymphatic infiltration and extensive lesion
(dermis and subcutis) are widely applied to make the RH diagnosis . Moreover, definitive diagnosis of a papillary lymphatic
angioendothelioma with partial “netlike” camouflage and D2-40 positivity was in arguement . The etiology of RH remains obscure. Latent
relations between malignant medical history and RH should be elucidated [2, 9]. In this case no evidence supports the internal link between
RH occurence and the past radiotherapy. No tumor-related deaths in RHs are observed under the circumstance of low metastasis. However, a
locally invasive RH in China and a metastatic RH in a six-year-old girl turned out to be lethal . Although adjuvant immunotherapy and
radiotherapy have been proved to be effective in several cases, none agreed tumor-responding treatments are recommended unless a complete
surgical excision is performed . Amanda and her colleagues, however, proposed specific appearance on dermoscopy as practical assistance to
diagnosis and therapy . In summary, a case of RH situating on pleura has been depicted which exhibited peculiar pathological, immunological
features and lesions. It has been reported as intrathoracic nodules predisposing a patient to unilateral pleural effusion. However
discussion has been placed on the causes and treatment of RH. It implies that RH on location other than skin or subcutis may lead to
corresponding symptoms or even threatened survival. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case
Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Retiform
hemangioendothelioma Carcino-embryonic antigen High resolution computed tomography Hemangioendothelioma Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma
Competing interests The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions QL collected the information and
drafted the manuscript. RO attended the patient, arranged the clinical examination. PC participated in the medical decisions. RZ revised the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information Qingqing Liu, Email: lqq.aileen@outlook.com Ruoyun
Ouyang, Email: ruoyun001@126.com Ping Chen, Email: pingchen0731@sina.com Rui Zhou, Phone: +86-731-5292100, Email: zhourui2355@sina.com We
thank Dr. Xia Wu at Department of Pathology and Dr. Juan Chen at Department of Radiology in the 2nd Xiangya Hospital for offering
information. We thank Prof. Hong Peng, Prof. Yan Chen at Department of Respiratory Medicine in the 2nd Xiangya Hospital and Dr. Ye Gan at
Yale University for helping drafting the manuscript. We thank Dr. Bowen Xie from the Center for Molecular Medicine of Central South
University for editing the pictures. Special gratitude should be shown to Prof. Daiqiang Li at Department of Pathology in the 2nd Xiangya
Hospital and Prof. Jihe Li at Department of Pathology in the 1st Xiangya Hospital for professional opinions in making the diagnosis. This
study is financially supported by grants from the National Key Clinical Specialty Construction Projects.
