Tension-band wiring (TBW) is a well-established fixation technique for two-part, transverse fracture types of the olecranon. However,
complication rates up to 80 % are reported. By reporting on the enormous impact on the patient if failed the aim of the present report was
to emphasize the importance of correct K wire positioning in TBW. We present the case of a 49-year-old woman who suffered from a radioulnar
synostosis of the forearm due to malpositioned K wires after TBW treatment. The patient was treated by heterotopic bone resection supported
by ossification prophylaxis (radiotherapy and Indomethacin). At follow-up of 12 months after revision surgery, elbow motion was unrestricted
with a strength grade 5/5. The patient was free of pain and reported no restrictions in daily as well as sporting activities. Radiologic
assessment showed no recurrence of heterotopic bone tissue. Intraoperative radiographic and clinical examination of the elbow is highly
recommended to identify incorrect hardware positioning and, therefore, to avoid serious postoperative complications in TBW. Isolated
olecranon fractures are the most common fractures of the proximal ulna and account for 10 % of upper extremity fractures. The direct fall
onto the elbow is the main injury pattern [1, 2]. Surgical treatment depends on the grade of fracture dislocation and the number of bony
fragments . Tension-band wiring (TBW) is a well-established fixation technique for two-part, transverse fracture types of the olecranon with
sufficient bone quality [3, 4]. Even though TBW is often considered as an easy and convenient surgical procedure, several imperfections are
described in the current literature and complication rates up to 80 % are reported . Proximal migration of Kirschner (K) wires followed by
the necessity of early hardware removal is the most frequent complication in case K wires are inserted into the medullary canal of the
distal ulna fragment . To avoid this complication, the modified technique involving the transcortical K wire placement through the anterior
cortex of the ulna has been introduced [9, 10]. Nevertheless, extensive hardware protrusion through the anterior ulnar cortex may result in
nerve and/or vascular injuries, impaired range of elbow motion and heterotopic ossification (HO) . In the following case, we refer a
proximal radioulnar synostosis (RUS) following TBW of a simple transverse olecranon fracture. To our research of the literature, there are
just two articles on this topic, and only one of them reported about the therapeutic management of this severe complication [15, 16]. The
purpose of the present article is, therefore, to emphasize the importance of correct K wire insertion during the TBW procedure by reporting
on the enormous impact on the patient if failed. The surgical approach including pre- and postoperative measures is described in detail and
discussed with reference to the current literature. A 49-year-old woman sustained a two-part olecranon fracture (AO 21-B1, Mayo type IIA )
in her left elbow. She was consequently treated by open reduction and internal fixation using the transcortical TBW technique. Immediately
after surgery the patient complained about persistent pain in her elbow, wrist and shoulder as well as strong difficulties to rotate the
forearm during physiotherapy. Despite the reported complaints the patient was advised to intensify physiotherapy. Follow-up radiographs
6 weeks postoperatively revealed not only union of the olecranon fracture, but also extensive protrusion of the K wires through the anterior
ulnar cortex scratching the radial tuberosity (Fig. 1). Both K wires were consequently removed in a second operation, but the tension-band
cerclage remained at its position. After K wires removal, the patient was encouraged again to enforce physiotherapy.Fig. 1Malpositioned K
wires after olecranon TBW. 3D computed tomography scans show the K wire placement within the radioulnar space at the radial tuberosity
6 weeks after initial surgery Malpositioned K wires after olecranon TBW. 3D computed tomography scans show the K wire placement within the
radioulnar space at the radial tuberosity 6 weeks after initial surgery Three months after trauma, the patient was presented to our
outpatient clinic due to a total block of supination and pronation with the forearm fixed in neutral position. The extension–flexion arc of
the elbow was 0°–5°–110°. Wrist and shoulder examinations showed a free range of motion (ROM); pain or sensomotoric restrictions did not
exist. Radiographs showed a massive synostosis between the radial tuberosity and the proximal ulna where previously the K wires had
penetrated the anterior radial cortex of the ulna (Fig. 2). Based on clinical and radiographic findings the resection of the synostotic bone
was indicated to restore forearm motion.Fig. 2Proximal radioulnar synostosis. a Massive radioulnar synostosis (white arrows) at the level of
the radial tuberosity 3 months after initial surgery. The olecranon fracture is healed while the cerclage wire remained in situ. b CT scans
show the heterotopic ossification starting from the distal biceps tendon (white star) insertion to the ulnar cortex Proximal radioulnar
synostosis. a Massive radioulnar synostosis (white arrows) at the level of the radial tuberosity 3 months after initial surgery. The
olecranon fracture is healed while the cerclage wire remained in situ. b CT scans show the heterotopic ossification starting from the distal
biceps tendon (white star) insertion to the ulnar cortex Two hours before revision surgery, a prophylactic radiotherapy (with a dosage of
7 Gy) focused on the proximal aspect of the forearm was performed to minimize the risk of synostotic recurrence [18, 19]. The previously
used dorsal approach was reopened and the remaining cerclage wire was removed a priori. Next, the approach was extended distally and the
supinator muscle was subperiosteally detached en bloc from the proximal ulna to expose the heterotopic bone formation (Fig. 3). We decided
for that approach to protect the posterior interosseous nerve (PIN) running through the supinator mass. The synostotic bone was first
exposed from its proximal to its distal extent. Second, by subperiosteal preparation the heterotopic bone formation was dissected step-by-
step to its radial extent at the radial tuberosity. This preparation was mainly performed by chiseling along well attached to the bone.
Thereby, it was carefully observed not to damage the distal biceps tendon that was immured by heterotopic bone. The synostosis was finally
removed all in one. Subsequent intraoperative examination revealed full pronation and supination movements before closure. For
rehabilitation, active and passive elbow exercises including immediate free forearm rotation started under physiotherapist’s supervision the
day after surgery. No splint or cast was applied. Indomethacin (50 mg 1–0–1 per day) was prescribed for 2 weeks for prophylaxis of
ossification .Fig. 3Dorsoradial approach for revision. Dorsoradial approach (black star olecranon tip) in prone position. After
subperiosteal en bloc detachment of the supinator muscle (white star) from the proximal ulna (red arrow) the heterotopic bone formation
(forceps) was exposed Dorsoradial approach for revision. Dorsoradial approach (black star olecranon tip) in prone position. After
subperiosteal en bloc detachment of the supinator muscle (white star) from the proximal ulna (red arrow) the heterotopic bone formation
(forceps) was exposed Ten weeks postoperatively the ROM of the elbow was 0°–10°–140° for extension–flexion arc and 75°–0°–90° for
pronation–supination arc. At final follow-up 12 months after surgery, the ROM was unrestricted when compared to the uninjured arm side
(Fig. 4). Supination strength was also unlimited presenting grade 5/5 on both arms. The patient was free of pain and reported no
restrictions in daily as well as sporting activities (swimming three times per week). Radiologic assessment showed no recurrence of
heterotopic bone tissue.Fig. 4Unrestricted elbow function 12 months after revision surgery. a Unrestricted pronation and b supination in
both arms (left elbow, red stick) Unrestricted elbow function 12 months after revision surgery. a Unrestricted pronation and b supination in
both arms (left elbow, red stick) TBW is often considered an easy-to-use operation technique to treat isolated simple olecranon fractures.
Many authors showed good-to-excellent short- to long-term clinical outcomes , however, different complication rates were observed in the
literature [1, 7, 11–16, 26, 27]. However, the development of an RUS due to hardware protrusion was—to the best of our knowledge—reported in
only two articles so far [15, 16]. Velkes et al. presented two cases of RUS following the transcortical technique within 3 months after
surgery. The authors supposed as mechanism that the RUS was induced by soft tissue trauma and bleeding resulting from the K wire protrusion
into the interosseous membrane and its surroundings. Consequently, secondary haematoma calcification was assumed for RUS development [28,
29]. Because both fractures showed bony healing within 6 weeks, a fracture-related mechanism for the RUS was not proposed by the authors. In
contrast, De Carli et al. reported on a case of HO following transcortical malpositioned K wires abutting against the radial cortex . In the
present case, the synostotic bone formation also originated probably from the radius, particularly in that area where the K wires have been
adjacent to the periosteum. Even though the K wires were removed 6 weeks after index surgery, signs of HOs at the proximal radioulnar joint
were already visible (Fig. 2). When compared to other reported cases of RUS, the development of HO in the present case was very fast
(probably induced from K wire irritation during forearm rotation within the first 6 weeks). We assume that the ongoing osseous erosion
induced an inflammatory process with local release of growth factors (e.g., TGF-β) which contributes to the excessive bone proliferation
process . The reported persistent pain during physiotherapy might also be indicative for that suggestion. And additionally, soft tissue
trauma during physiotherapy (e.g., of the supinator muscle) might have played a role in HO synthesis . Regarding the clinical outcome, De
Carli et al. reported an excellent result after surgical removal of the synostosis and subsequent ossification prophylaxis with Indomethacin
after 3 years of follow-up. Radiographs showed no signs of recurrence . Similarly, with a 12 month follow-up the present patient showed
excellent functional results and no radiographic signs of recurrent ossification as well. Velkes et al. did not report further therapeutic
measures because both patients declined revision. The development of an RUS has been considered from soft tissue hematoma calcification by
several authors [15, 28]. In the context of the present case we do not confirm this theory. The HO resection procedure would have also
caused perioperative hematoma but no evidence of recurrent ossification was seen in the postoperative course. To avoid synostotic
recurrence, different measures are frequently discussed in the current literature. In contrast to the case reports cited above, additional
radiotherapy was performed in the present case before surgery. For lower extremities, it is evident that the combination of radiation and
NSAID (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) should be used for prophylaxis of synostotic recurrence . In upper extremity HOs likewise, a
combined therapy regime has shown to successfully prevent synostotic recurrence [18, 32]. HOs around the elbow is not suspected to appear
later than 3 months after the initiating trigger (trauma or surgery) [18, 33]. De Carli et al. applied Indomethacin over the period of
6 weeks postoperatively in their case. Their decision was based on the concomitant nonunion of the olecranon fracture and the higher risk of
non-healing subsequent to radiotherapy [16, 34]. After intramedullary repositioning of the K wires and excision of HO with osteoperiosteal
decortication, fracture union was achieved . The authors supposed that the malpositioned K wires and subsequent RUS might play a role during
development of the nonunion by allowing rotational movement to the fracture site . The present olecranon fracture showed bony healing within
6 weeks despite the malpositioned K wires and an impingement at the proximal radius, respectively. Therefore, one might speculate that the
synostotic bone development in the present case was not induced due to a mechanical impingement phenomenon resulting in loosened K wires and
fracture nonunion, but due to ongoing soft tissue irritation and periosteal microtrauma at the proximal radius. De Carli et al. , in their
case report, also assumed that the HO developed as a result of periosteal stimulation following K wire impingement during pronation and
supination. To prevent such intraoperative complications and not to harm proximate structures, the explicit knowledge of the proximal
forearm anatomy is required. For TBW, current studies recommend to insert the K wires from a more lateral entry point into the olecranon tip
and aiming towards the ulnar midshaft to avoid interference with the proximal radial shaft and the proximal radioulnar articulation,
respectively [11, 27]. Surgeons have to be aware of the normal varus angulation of the proximal ulna not to place the pins in direction of
the radius and to avoid impingement between hardware and radial neck [35, 36]. While K wires are inserted, the forearm should be positioned
in supination . Intraoperative fluoroscopic examination is essential to recognize implant interfering with the proximal radius. For TBW and
for plating of olecranon fractures as well, a clear proximal radioulnar space (PRUJ, respectively) has to be outlined using a slightly
oblique a.p. view during operative procedure (Fig. 5). In addition, an accurate intraoperative assessment of forearm rotation should be
performed to ensure free ROM and the absence of noticeable crepitation.Fig. 5Intraoperative fluoroscopic examination. a TBW after olecranon
osteotomy for osteosynthesis of distal humeral fracture (left K wires are directed ulnarly, right the slight oblique a.p. view verifies the
free proximal radioulnar space (white arrow); b both views (white arrows) demonstrate the free proximal radioulnar space after plating of
the proximal ulna Intraoperative fluoroscopic examination. a TBW after olecranon osteotomy for osteosynthesis of distal humeral fracture
(left K wires are directed ulnarly, right the slight oblique a.p. view verifies the free proximal radioulnar space (white arrow); b both
views (white arrows) demonstrate the free proximal radioulnar space after plating of the proximal ulna Impaired rotational movements during
rehabilitation have led one to think about interfering pins. In case of inexplicable discomfort and ongoing pain, further radiological
assessment (favored CT scans) is indicated because a malpositioning of K wires is often not visible in standard X-rays (a.p. and lateral
view). To sum up, accurate operative approach is necessary to avoid such perooperative adverse events in olecranon TBW as described above.
In the present case clinical outcome was excellent after HO resection with supportive radiotherapy and Indomethacin administration. No HO
recurrence was detected throughout which might confirm the theory that the RUS was induced due to periostal K wire scratching during forearm
rotation resulting in local inflammatory process but not from postoperative hematoma calcification. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. heterotopic ossification Kirschner posterior interosseous nerve range of motion radioulnar synostosis
tension-band wiring Lukas Willinger and Martin Lucke contributed equally to this work Guarantors of integrity of entire study, LW, ML, SS;
study concepts/design LW, ML, SS; data acquisition and/or data analysis/interpretation, LW, GHS, SS; manuscript drafting, LW, ML, SS;
manuscript revision for important intellectual content, all authors; manuscript final version approval, all authors; literature research,
LW, MC, PB, SS; and manuscript editing, all authors. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. None. The authors declare that they
have no competing interests.
