Acute kidney injury due to glomerular bleeding has been described with IgA nephropathy and supratherapeutic warfarin anticoagulation. There
is usually demonstrable tubular obstruction by erythrocyte casts associated with acute tubular injury. Although severe thrombocytopaenia
increases the risk of bleeding, most cases of haematuria have been ascribed to non-glomerular or urological bleeding without a direct link
to acute kidney injury. We describe a patient with acute kidney injury due to glomerular bleeding and tubular injury related to severe
thrombocytopaenia, who was subsequently found to have thin basement membrane disease. A 56 year old man presented with macroscopic
haematuria, acute kidney injury and a platelet count of 35 × 109/L, in the absence of anticoagulation. Urinalysis demonstrated an active
urinary sediment. His kidney biopsy demonstrated extensive intraluminal erythrocyte casts associated with acute tubular injury, along with
haemosiderin deposition suggestive of recurrent glomerular bleeding. There was no histological evidence of glomerular pathology but electron
microscopy analysis demonstrated thin basement membrane disease and effacement of podocyte foot processes. During long term follow-up,
thrombocytopaenia and intermittent haematuria persisted. At 9 months, the patient progressed to Stage 5 chronic kidney disease with the
development of gross renal atrophy. Recurrent macroscopic haematuria may be a risk factor for progressive renal injury in patients with thin
basement membrane. The mechanism may be due to recurrent acute kidney injury from glomerular bleeding leading to repeated tubular damage. In
the absence of anticoagulation, severe thrombocytopaenia may be a risk factor for heavy glomerular bleeding and acute kidney injury in these
patients. The development of acute kidney injury (AKI) due to glomerular haemorrhage has been described in patients with IgA nephropathy and
warfarin over-anticoagulation [1, 2]. The latter has been termed warfarin-related nephropathy. Patients often report macroscopic haematuria
and the mechanism of injury is thought to be intraluminal tubular obstruction by erythrocyte casts and toxic injury from haemoglobin
breakdown products . Severe thrombocytopenia has also been associated with haematuria but the majority of reports indicate a non-glomerular
(urological) origin which does not directly cause AKI. We report a patient who developed AKI in the setting of glomerular haematuria
precipitated by thrombocytopenia, who was subsequently found to have thin basement membrane disease. A 56-year old man presented to a
regional hospital with acute gout of the right knee, on a background of 6 months of lethargy, easy bruising, epistaxis and recent episodes
of macroscopic haematuria. On presentation, he was noted to have AKI, anaemia, thrombocytopaenia and abnormal liver function tests. His past
medical history included gout, alcoholism (10 standard drinks daily), gastro-oesophageal reflux and previous gastric fundoplication. He was
not on any regular medications. He lived alone and was an active smoker of 20 pack-years but denied intravenous or recreational drugs. He
reported no fever, sweats or weight loss (body mass index, 22.9 kg/m2). He had no haemodynamic compromise and was transferred to our centre
for further management. On arrival, his blood pressure was 140/80 mmHg. He had a normal mental status and no focal neurological signs.
Physical examination was notable for mild hepatomegaly, subcutaneous bruising and spider naevi. Macroscopic haematuria was evident when the
patient voided. His vital signs were normal and the laboratory results on arrival are shown in Table 1. The blood film showed target cells,
anisocytosis, stomatocytes, occasional myelocytes and confirmed thrombocytopaenia. In retrospect, thrombocytopaenia was first noted eight
months prior to presentation (platelet count, 60 × 106/L; reference range , 150–400 × 106/L). At this time, the patient’s serum creatinine
was 100 μmol/L (RR, 60–110 μmol/L), with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 73 ml/min. Kidney function was noted to be
slightly impaired (serum creatinine, 113 umol/L (eGFR, 63 ml/min) four months ago, after the onset of haematuria was noted.Table 1Laboratory
parametersParameterPatient valueReferenceHaemoglobin (g/L)73130–180White cells ( × 109/L)5.84.0–11.0Plateletes ( ×
109/L)35150–450Neutrophils ( × 109/L)2.932.00–8.00Lymphocytes ( × 109/L)1.831.00–4.00Eosinophils ( × 109/L)0.040.00–0.50Reticulocytes
(%)2.80.3–2.5Reticulocyte count ( × 109/L)5920–110International normalised ratio (ratio)1.20.8–1.2Activated thromboplastin time
(seconds)2722–32Fibrinogen (g/L)2.81.5–4.0D-dimer (mg/L)0.120.00–0.20Haptoglobin (g/L)1.180.36–1.95Lactate dehydrogenase
(U/L)157100–200Direct anti-globulin testNegativeC-reactive protein (mg/L)0.60.0-5.0Sodium (mmol/L)134135–145Potassium
(mmol/L)3.83.5–4.5Chloride (mmol/L)105101–111Bicarbonate (mmol/L)2222–32Urea (mmol/L)17.62.5–9.6Creatinine (μmol/L)26055–105Calcium
(mmol/L)2.152.20–2.60Magnesium (mmol/L)0.670.74–1.03Phosphate (mmol/L)1.360.80–1.50Albumin (g/L)2835–45Alkaline phosphatase
(U/L)11230–120Alanine transaminase (U/L)427–56γ-glutamyl transferase (U/L)2037–64Vitamin B12 (pmol/L)494140–670Red cell folate
(nmol/L)3110>800Uric acid (mmol/L)0.660.24–0.50 Laboratory parameters Autoimmune studies were negative including: anti-nuclear, anti-
extractable nuclear antigens, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic, anti-glomerular basement membrane, anti-double stranded DNA antibodies. The serum
electrophoresis revealed neither serum paraprotein nor increased free light chains. Serology was negative for hepatitis B, C and HIV. Serum
IgA level was elevated at 6.7 g/L (RR, 0.80–4.50 g/L) with normal IgG and IgM levels. Serum complement was low on presentation, with a C3 of
0.56 g/L (RR, 0.79–1.52 g/L) and C4 of 0.10 (RR, 0.16–0.38 g/L). Blood cultures were negative on two separate occasions. Urinalysis of a
sterile, mid-stream sample confirmed haematuria, with an erythrocyte count >999× 106/L (RR, <13 × 106/L) and leukocyte count of 10 × 106/L
(RR, <10 × 106/L). Urine sediment analysis showed dysmorphic erythrocytes and casts, consistent with a glomerular origin. A 24-h urine
collection showed a protein excretion of 1.8 g/24 h (protein:creatinine ratio 0.25 g/mmol; RR, 0.00–0.03 g/mmol). Abdominal ultrasound
demonstrated mild hepatomegaly with diffuse echogenicity consistent with hepatic steatosis. The kidneys measured 11.1 cm and 11.4 cm, with
no hydronephrosis. Urine cytology was negative for malignant cells. Acute glomerulonephritis was suspected and he was treated with
intravenous methylprednisolone. An urgent kidney biopsy was performed after platelet transfusion to a count of 102 × 109/L. A bone marrow
biopsy was also performed. The kidney specimens demonstrated cortex with 27 glomeruli, of which 6 were globally sclerosed. The principal
abnormality was extensive tubular intra-luminal erythrocyte cast formation associated with acute tubular necrosis (Fig. 1). The presence of
haemosiderin deposition within tubular cells was suggestive of recurrent glomerular bleeding. There was interstitial fibrosis and tubular
atrophy (approximately 30 %), along with a mild inflammatory infiltrate without eosinophils or granulomas. Glomerular capillary loops
appeared normal and there were no segmental necrotizing lesions or crescents. Immunoperoxidase stains showed weak, non-specific mesangial
staining for IgM (1+) and no significant staining for IgA, IgG, C3, C1q and fibrinogen. Electron microscopy showed thinning of the
glomerular basement membrane but no immune complexes. The average glomerular basement membrane thickness was 251 ± 70 nm (range,
125–439 nm), consistent with thin basement membrane disease. This was associated with incomplete pedicel effacement, indicating
podocytopathy (Fig. 2). Bone marrow examination showed moderately reduced megakarypoeisis but otherwise normal haemopoeitic function.
Cytogenetics and immunophenotyping were unremarkable.Fig. 1Kidney biopsy showing obstructing tubular red cell casts associated with acute
tubular injury (haematoxylin and eosin stain, magnification × 200). Inset: Perl’s stain demonstrating haemosiderin (blue) accumulation
within tubular epithelial cells (magnification × 200)Fig. 2Electron microscopy demonstrating widespread effacement of podocyte foot
processes in keeping with a podocytopathy. The glomerular basement shows considerable variation in calibre, with focal areas of attenuation.
The mean thickness of the glomerular basement membrane was 251 nm (original magnification × 5000) Kidney biopsy showing obstructing tubular
red cell casts associated with acute tubular injury (haematoxylin and eosin stain, magnification × 200). Inset: Perl’s stain demonstrating
haemosiderin (blue) accumulation within tubular epithelial cells (magnification × 200) Electron microscopy demonstrating widespread
effacement of podocyte foot processes in keeping with a podocytopathy. The glomerular basement shows considerable variation in calibre, with
focal areas of attenuation. The mean thickness of the glomerular basement membrane was 251 nm (original magnification × 5000) The patient’s
macroscopic haematuria ceased after correction of platelet count and intravenous desmopressin given for biopsy. The serum creatinine peaked
at 552 μmol/L and subsequently improved. He maintained a good urine output and was discharged for outpatient follow-up. He achieved a best
serum creatinine of 250 μmol/L at 6 months, with significant chronic kidney disease (eGFR, 25 ml/min) with mild proteinuria
(protein:creatinine ratio, 0.07–0.10 g/mmol). He continued to experience episodes of macroscopic haematuria and AKI although not to the
extent experienced on initial admission. His platelet count continued to fluctuate at 26–53 × 109/L. A second bone marrow biopsy 4 months
later only showed mildly reduced megakaryopoiesis. A reduced production of thrombopoeitin associated with liver disease and the direct toxic
effects of alcohol may be potential factors contributing to the reduced platelet production. Repeat serum complement and autoimmune studies
were normal on two separate occasions. After nine months of ongoing alcohol intake, repeat abdominal ultrasound noted hepatic nodularity and
small volume ascites. The spleen was borderline enlarged, measuring 14.0 × 7.24 × 6.08 cm, giving a splenic volume of 323 cm3. Thus, splenic
sequestration-destruction could also be contributing to the thrombocytopaenia. The follow-up ultrasound also noted a reduction in kidney
size (right 9.4 cm, left 10.2 cm), associated with an eGFR of 15 ml/min. Due to progression of his chronic kidney disease, he has been
worked up for long term haemodialysis with the creation of an arterio-venous fistula. The differential diagnosis of AKI in the setting of
thrombocytopaenia includes infection (e.g. sepsis with disseminated intravascular coagulation, malaria, leptospirosis), malignant
hypertension, autoimmune disease (e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus), myeloma, drug side-effect (e.g. ticlodipine) and thrombotic
microangiopathy (e.g. haemolytic-uraemic syndrome, thrombotic thrombocytopaenic purpura). In our patient, the clinical, biochemical and
serological findings did not support any of these diagnoses. Infection was unlikely given the absence of fever, normal C-reactive protein
and sterile blood cultures. There was no laboratory evidence of haemolysis or neurological abnormality to suggest thrombotic
microangiopathy. Rarely, thrombocytopaenia and glomerular disease can result from mutations in the myosin heavy chain 9 (MYH9) gene. The
MYH9-related disorders are also associated with large platelets (macrothrombocytopaenia), leukocyte inclusion bodies and sensori-neural
hearing loss. Our patient had no family history of renal disease or thrombocytopaenia and was not hearing impaired. He had morphologically
normal leukocytes and platelets on a standard blood film. The mean platelet volume was 8.6 fL (RR, 6.5–12.0 fL), which argues against
macrothrombocytopaenia. His thrombocytopaenia was also a recent development, having had a platelet count of 230 × 109/L four years
previously, suggesting an acquired rather than inherited abnormality. The association between anticoagulation and haematuria is well
recognized and may result in AKI through different mechanisms . A number of case reports have suggested that an underlying glomerular
abnormality may predispose to warfarin-related nephropathy, including lupus nephritis , focal segmental glomerulosclerosis , IgA nephropathy
and thin basement membrane disease . In the original case series of nine patients reported by Brodsky et al. on warfarin-related
nephropathy, five patients had mild glomerular immune deposition (of which three were IgA on immunofluorescence) and one had focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis. However, the status of the glomerular basement membrane was not mentioned in that paper . In the absence of
coagulopathy, macroscopic haematuria with AKI is mostly reported with IgA nephropathy. Other causes of glomerular haematuria such as
Alport’s syndrome and proliferative glomerulonephritides (e.g. lupus, vasculitis) have not been clearly associated with macroscopic
haematuria-associated AKI . We report a patient with an acquired thrombocytopaenia precipitating glomerular haematuria and tubular injury,
who was subsequently discovered to have thin basement membrane disease on renal biopsy. The mechanism of AKI is similar to that described
for warfarin-related nephropathy and IgA nephropathy. Typically, there is acute tubular injury with prominent obstructive erythrocyte casts
[1, 2]. The incidence of macroscopic haematuria due to severe thrombocytopaenia in adults is unclear. In a paediatric retrospective series
of 332 children with immune thrombocytopaenia over a 10-year period, 17 % experienced at least one episode of major haemorrhage, which
included a subgroup with macroscopic haematuria (6 episodes of macroscopic haematuria, 17 episodes of bleeding from multiple sites which may
include haematuria). Major haemorrhage mostly occurred in patients with platelet counts <20 × 109/L. Only 13 % of events occurred with
platelet counts of 20–75 × 109/L. The nature of the bleeding or presence of pre-existing kidney disease was not specified . In a prospective
observational study of 169 neonates with platelet counts <60 × 109/L, haematuria was detected in 40 % by dipstick or microscopy . These
paediatric studies suggest that thrombocytopaenia-associated macroscopic haematuria is rare compared to microscopic haematuria. However, the
source of the haematuria has not been clearly ascertained in these studies (glomerular or urological). In warfarin-treated patients,
haematuria may be non-glomerular (urological) rather than glomerular (warfarin-related nephropathy), with the risk of haematuria much higher
in over-anticoagulated patients and may be transient . In thrombocytopaenic patients, there are certainly case reports demonstrating
ureteric bleeding, with or without associated stone disease [10, 11]. Histologically demonstrable extravasation of erythrocytes from the
bladder capillaries, manifesting as haematuria with diffuse submucosal petechiae on cystoscopy has been described in a patient with immune-
mediated thrombocytopaenia (platelet count 33 × 109/L) . The evidence for glomerular haematuria in thrombocytopaenic patients, however, is
lacking. Thus, this is a unique case report which histologically demonstrates glomerular haematuria-associated AKI in the setting of severe
thrombocytopaenia. There is also strong epidemiological evidence that AKI is associated with the development and progression of chronic
kidney disease. This has also been suggested by studies of warfarin-related nephropathy . The concern of recurrent AKI begs the question of
how aggressive clinicians should treat severe thrombocytopaenia in patients with an underlying risk factor for glomerular haematuria. Thin
basement membrane disease has traditionally been considered a relatively benign condition but recurrent episodes of AKI related to
macroscopic haematuria may be considered a risk factor for chronic kidney disease progression and end-stage renal failure. Haematuria in the
setting of severe thrombocytopaenia may be glomerular or non-glomerular in origin. Given the rarity of AKI from glomerular haematuria with
platelet counts >20 × 109/L, an underlying glomerular abnormality such as thin basement membrane disease should be considered. Heavy
glomerular bleeding may result in recurrent AKI and progression of chronic kidney disease in patients with thin basement membrane disease.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. acute kidney injury estimated glomerular filtration rate reference
range Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AKHL collected the clinical
information, drafted the manuscript and contributed to the discussion. SB provided haematological opinion, critical analysis of the case and
contributed to the discussion. IS and JPD reviewed and reported the pathological findings of the kidney biopsy, provided the histological
image for publication and contributed to the discussion. All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript. We thank Mr
Paul Crammer (renal scientist, Anatomical Pathology, Monash Health) for his assessment of the GBM thickness on electron microscopy. The
authors have not received any specific grant or funding for the publication of this research.
