In the Brazilian Amazon, American tegumentary leishmaniasis (ATL) is endemic and presents a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations due, in
part, to the circulation of at least seven Leishmania species. Few reports of Leishmania (Viannia) naiffi infection suggest that its
occurrence is uncommon and the reported cases present a benign clinical course and a good response to treatment. This study aimed to
strengthen the clinical and epidemiological importance of L. (V.) naiffi in the Amazon Region (Manaus, state of Amazonas) and to report
therapeutic failure in patients infected with this species. Thirty Leishmania spp samples isolated from cutaneous lesions were characterised
by multilocus enzyme electrophoresis. As expected, the most common species was Leishmania (V.) guyanensis (20 cases). However, a relevant
number ofL. (V.) naiffi patients (8 cases) was observed, thus demonstrating that this species is not uncommon in the region. No patient
infected withL. (V.) naiffi evolved to spontaneous cure until the start of treatment, which indicated that this species may not have a self-
limiting nature. In addition, two of the patients experienced a poor response to antimonial or pentamidine therapy. Thus, either ATL cases
due to L. (V.) naiffi cannot be as uncommon as previously thought or this species is currently expanding in this region. American
tegumentary leishmaniasis (ATL) is highly endemic in the state of Amazonas (AM), Brazil. According to the Information System on Notifiable
Diseases database, 18,675 Brazilian cases were reported in 2013, 8% of which occurred in the city of Manaus, AM (SVS/MS 2015). In this
region, control of the disease is considered difficult because of the epidemiological characteristics and socioeconomic conditions
associated with the sylvatic transmission cycle. In addition, environmental changes may influence infection dynamics, which makes control
even more difficult. The circulation of at least seven Leishmania species has been observed in ATL in the Amazon Region. Leishmania
(Viannia) guyanensisis the most prevalent species and is highly endemic in north of the Amazon River (Naiff et al. 1988, Grimaldi Jr et al.
1991, Lainson et al. 1994, Romero et al. 2001a, 2002a,Guerra et al. 2003). In this sense, several studies have shown that the frequency of
circulating species in this area varies (Table I) and that Leishmania (V.) naiffi seems to be more consistently isolated from cutaneous
lesions in patients from this region. TABLE IFrequency of Leishmania species associated with American tegumentary leishmaniasis in Amazon
Region LeishmaniaspeciesCases (n)Relative proportion within the study (%)Region of endemicity state (city)Reference L. (Viannia) guyanensis
6164.9Amapá, Amazonas, Pará and RondôniaGrimaldi Jr et al. (1991) L. (V.) braziliensis 1516 L. (V.) naiffi 1010.6 L. (Leishmania)
amazonensis 66.4 Not identified22.1 L. (V.) guyanensis 6997.2Amazonas (Manaus)Romero et al. (2002b) L. (V.) braziliensis 22.8 L. (V.)
braziliensis 1653.3Acre (Rio Branco)da Silva et al. (2006) L. (V.) lainsoni 1240 L. (V.) guyanensis 13.3 Hybrid: L. (V.) lainsoni/L. (V.)
naiffi 13.4 L. (V.) guyanensis 1076.9Amazonas (Manaus)Figueira et al. (2008) L. (V.) naiffi 323.1 L. (V.) guyanensis 880Amazonas (Rio Preto
da Eva)Figueira et al. (2008) L. (V.) naiffi 220 L. (V.) guyanensis 8089Amazonas (Rio Preto da Eva)Figueira et al. (2014) L. (L.)
amazonensis 77.8 L. (V.) naiffi 33.3 L. (V.) braziliensis 1125.6Pará (lower Amazon Region)Jennings et al. (2014) L. (V.) guyanensis 613.9 L.
(V.) shawi 49.3 L. (V.) shawi 716.3 L. (V.) lainsoni 613.9 L. (L.) amazonensis 24.7Hybrid: L. (V.) guyanensis/ L. (V.) shawi shawi 716.3 L.
(V.) naiffi was first described by Lainson and Shaw (1989) after being isolated from an armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus) in the state of
Pará, northern Brazil. The few cases described in the literature usually associate L. (V.) naiffiwith low rates of virulence in humans.
Thus, it has been described that the disease evolves with a benign clinical course and a good response to treatment (Naiff et al. 1991,
Pratlong et al. 2002). Furthermore, two cases of spontaneous healing of leishmaniasis caused by L. (V.) naiffi were described (van der Snoek
et al. 2009). To date, however, no association between L. (V.) naiffi and mucosal leishmaniasis has been observed. L. (V.) naiffi cutaneous
leishmaniasis lesions are usually ulcerated, unique, small and located on the hands, arms or legs (Naiff et al. 1991). In the same way,
experimental studies have shown that L. (V.) naiffi frequently causes discrete or even nonapparent infections on hamsters’ skin (Lainson &
Shaw 1989). These findings were supported by in vitro analysis, which demonstrated that L. (V.) naiffi showed the lowest infection index and
the highest nitric oxide production compared with other species of the Viannia subgenus (Campos et al. 2008). Then, the clinical and
experimental information previously reported supported the idea that infection by L. (V.) naiffi commonly results in benign manifestations.
Therefore, the present study aimed to strengthen the awareness of the clinical and epidemiological importance of L. (V.) naiffi in the
Amazon Region and to report therapeutic failure associated with this species. Thirty Leishmania spp samples were isolated from cutaneous
lesions of patients from different surrounding areas of Manaus. Samples were collected during 2011-2013 at the Heitor Vieira Dourado
Tropical Medicine Foundation (FMT-HVD), a reference centre for tropical diseases in AM. Skin lesion fragments obtained by biopsy were
cultured in Novy-Neal-Nicolle medium and Leishmania was isolated. Parasites were sent to the Leishmania Collection from the Oswaldo Cruz
Institute for species identification. This study was approved by the Research Ethical Committee of FMT-HVD (protocol 21273572).
Identification of Leishmaniaspp isolates was based on multilocus enzyme electrophoresis (MLEE) and performed on agarose gel and allelic
variations were tested for the following enzymes: 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (EC1.1.1.44), glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(E.C.1.1.1.49) and isocitrate dehydrogenase (E.C.1.1.1.42). The method was performed in accordance with the conditions described by
Cupolillo et al. (1994). Four species were identified: L. (V.) guyanensis 66.7% (20/30),L. (V.) naiffi 26.7% (8/30), Leishmania (Leishmania)
amazonensis 3.3% (1/30) and Leishmania (V.) shawi 3.3% (1/30). As expected, the most common species was L. (V.) guyanensis. Surprisingly,
none of the isolates were characterised as L. (V.) brazi- liensis. According to Romero et al. (2002b), cases of ATL caused byL. (V.)
braziliensis are uncommon in nearby Manaus. Interestingly, the frequency of L. (V.) naiffi was 26.7% (8/30), which indicates that this
species could be an etiologic agent of CL more frequent than expected in this region. These data corroborate those obtained by Figueira et
al. (2008), who observed a relevant number of CL associated withL. (V.) naiffi in the municipalities of Rio Preto da Eva and Manaus. Several
methods have been used to define Leishmania species (Degrave et al. 1994, Romero et al. 2001a, Coelho et al. 2011). Nevertheless, MLEE
remains one of the main tools for characterisingLeishmania because it reveals polymorphisms that express phenotypes of population variations
and taxonomically classify the different species of this parasite (Cupolillo et al. 1994). Precise identification of Leishmania spp is
fundamental to understanding the disease’s epidemiology; improving the current knowledge concerning its pathology and the control measures
(Coelho et al. 2011). Thus, it is likely that the transmission of L. (V.) naiffi in the Amazon Region is more frequent than has been
reported. In this connection, the CL patients infected byL. (V.) naiffi (n = 8) are described below. All of them were men with a mean age of
37.4 ± 13.7 years (median = 37.5 years). The mean days of duration was 30 ± 24.8 days [median = 30 days (95% confidence interval: 22.5 -
52.5)]. The number of lesions ranged from one-four. Four subjects were initially treated with antimonial and four individuals were initially
treated with pentamidine (antimonial: 10-20 mg Sb+5/kg/day for 20/30 consecutive days; pentamidine: 3 doses of 4 mg/kg with an interval of
72 h between doses) (Table II). Two of the patients experienced a poor response to antimonial or pentamidine therapy. TABLE IIDemographic
and clinical data of patients infected withLeishmania (Viannia) naiffi Patient IDGenderAgeLesions (n)Location of lesionDisease durations
(days)Presence of amastigotesTreatmentOutcome1M361Upper limb30+Antimonial (20 days) + antimonial (30 days)Failure2M391Lower
limb90+Pentamidine (3 doses) + pentamidine (3 doses)Failure3M591Upper limb60+Antimonial (20 doses)Cure4M301Upper limb15+Antimonial (20
doses)Cure5M294Upper limb20+Pentamidine (3 doses)Cure6M392Lower limb30+Pentamidine (3 doses)Cure7M522Face30+Antimonial (20
doses)Cure8M151Lower limb30+Pentamidine (3 doses)CureM: male; +: positive smears of scarifications. M: male; +: positive smears of
scarifications. Previous studies have suggested that the Leishmania species and the endemic area examined can be influenced by the cure rate
(Romero et al. 2001b, Arevalo et al. 2007). In a recent study conducted in AM, the cure rates in L. (V.) guyanensis infection after
treatment with antimonial or pentamidine were 55.5% and 58.1%, respectively (Neves et al. 2011). To date, all of the studies described in
the literature have associated infection by L. (V.) naiffi with spontaneous healing or a good therapeutic response. However, the data
obtained by our group showed therapeutic failure in a patient who was infected by L. (V.) naiffi and treated with pentamidine (R Vieira-
Gonçalves, unpublished observations). Corroborating this finding, we herein illustrate two new CL cases that are associated with L. (V.)
naiffi infection and presented pentamidine or antimonial-resistant lesions (Table II), which indicates that the clinical evolution of
infection from this species may not be as favourable as described. No cases of spontaneously healing was seem probably because the short
period of disease duration until the diagnosis establishment. The cases of L. (V.) naiffireported herein underline that this species may not
have a self-limiting nature, as previously described (Naiff et al. 1991, van der Snoek et al. 2009), and could not be as uncommon as
referenced (Grimaldi Jr et al. 1991,Figueira et al. 2014). The present results highlight the importance of characterising Leishmania spp in
areas that exhibit a sympatric circulation of Leishmania spp parasites to define the epidemiological importance of each of these species to
human disease. This knowledge can improve the surveillance and therapeutic approaches used to achieve a clinical cure. To the technicians of
the Leishmaniasis Management of FMT-HVD, specially to Yolanda F Noguth and Maria Rita Teixeira, and to Sabrina S Guimarães, for clinical
assistance. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the paper.
Financial support: IOC/FIOCRUZ, PAPESIV/VPPDT/FIOCRUZ, FAPERJ-APQ1 (E-26/110.497/2011), CNPq (458858/2014-5) AMD-C and EC are CNPq and
FAPERJ (CNE) research fellow.
