To the Editor: A 58-year-old man was presented with the complaints of epigastric pain, nonbilious vomiting, and progressive distension of
the abdomen for the last 1 month. There was no significant history. Physical examination was within normal limit except abdominal distension
with hyperactive peristalsis. Laboratory examinations were normal except blood urea nitrogen: 35 mg/dl, creatinine: 1.45 mg/dl, hemoglobin:
10.5 g/dl, and leukocyte counts: 17,000/mm3. Ultrasonography showed gastric distension and a 12 mm in size, lobulated wall thickening in the
gastric outlet. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed dilated stomach with food residue, gaping pylorus with hyperemic mucosa, and a 15
mm in size ulcered lesion protruding into the lumen of the duodenal bulb [Figure 1]. The endoscope could not be achieved in the second part
of the duodenum. Body and antral biopsies were performed endoscopically by specialized gastrointestinal pathologists for Helicobacter pylori
(H. pylori). Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging showed enlarged stomach and “target sign” in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen
convenient with the duodenoduodenal intussusception without definite cause for the intussusception [Figure 2]. High-dose proton pump
inhibitor (pantoprazole 40 mg b.i.d.) was given to the patient. Eradication therapy was initiated for H. pylori after the reporting of
histological examination. In the left picture, a 15 mm in size ulcered lesion protruding into the lumen of the duodenal bulb was seen in
upper gastrointestinal endoscopy; in the right picture, ulcer healing and resolution of the intussusception were shown by control endoscopy.
Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging showed enlarged stomach and “target sign” in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen convenient with
the duodenoduodenal intussusception without definite cause for the intussusception. At follow-up, his complaints were regressed and control
endoscopy showed ulcer healing and resolution of the intussusception on the sixth day of therapy [Figure 1]. Intussusception is the
invagination of a segment of the intestine into another. It is rare in adults (1–5%). Retrograde intussusception which is described as the
invagination through the proximal direction is very uncommon accounting for only 5% of the whole cases of intussusception. Clinical symptoms
of duodenoduodenal intussusception include epigastric pain, abdominal mass, gastrointestinal bleeding, and enteral obstruction. Mechanical
factors such as adhesions, long mesentery, gastric dismotility, and sudden increase in abdominal pressure may be responsible for the
etiopathogenesis of reverse intussusception. It is a well-described complication that occurs in late course after the gastrointestinal
surgery. In our case, adhesion secondary to inflammation may cause reverse intussusception. This is the first reported case of retrograde
duodenoduodenal intussusception as a complication of duodenal ulcer. Adhesions resulting from the inflammation can lead the intussusception
in our case. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. Edited by: Yi Cui
