These authors contributed equally to this work. To the Editor: Patients with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) of a classical
phenotype present within the first year of life with life-threatening infections and failure to thrive.1 The X-linked T−B+ natural killer
(NK)− form of SCID is the most frequent type (44% to 46%) and is a consequence of mutations in the IL-2 receptor γ (IL2RG) gene (OMIM
308380), which encodes the common cytokine receptor γ chain (γc).2 The γc acts as a signal-transducing subunit of cytokine receptors that
are essential in the ontogeny and function of T, B, and NK cells, namely IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and IL-21. The intracellular part of
γc interacts with Janus kinase 3 and mediates phosphorylation and activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
proteins, which regulate induction of gene transcription. A number of patients with a milder form of combined immunodeficiency, often termed
“leaky” or “hypomorphic” SCID, have been described. Here we describe 2 male relatives with a novel hypomorphic mutation in the IL2RG
promoter who presented with a phenotype more akin to common variable immunodeficiency (CVID). CVID is the most common clinically and
genetically heterogeneous primary immunodeficiency, which is characterized by low IgG, IgA, and/or IgM levels, with a failure to produce
specific antibodies.3 Mutations in genes encoding transmembrane activator and CAML interactor (TACI), inducible costimulator (ICOS), CD19,
CD20, CD21, CD81, LRBA, CXCR4, NF-κB2, B cell–activating factor of the TNF family (BAFF) receptor, TNF-related weak inducer of apoptosis
(TWEAK), phosphoinositide 3-kinase catalytic subunit δ polypeptide (PI3KCD), and PI3KR1 were shown to cause CVID-like phenotypes.3 The
grandson presented at age 4 years with a history of recurrent bacterial otitis media and chronic suppurative rhinitis, rotavirus-induced
gastroenteritis (age 18 months), echoviral gastroenteritis (age 2 years), and varicella zoster (age 4 years). He had IgG deficiency
(1.8 g/L) with normal IgA and IgM levels (1.0 and 0.5 g/L, respectively) and did not mount an adequate response to the 23-valent
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (Pneumovax; Merck & Co, Whitehouse Station, NJ), although he responded appropriately to immunization
with protein antigens (see Table E1 in this article's Online Repository at www.jacionline.org). He had normal numbers of T and B cells but
completely absent NK cells. T-cell proliferation after stimulation with PHA, anti-CD3, and Candida species was suboptimal but not completely
abrogated. He was started on immunoglobulin replacement therapy and is well, with his infections limited to recalcitrant cutaneous warts. At
the time of his diagnosis, it was noted that his maternal grandfather was under treatment for CVID. The grandfather presented to an
immunology team at the age of 34 years with a 20-year history of recurrent otosinopulmonary tract infections with Streptococcus pneumoniae
and Haemophilus influenzae, bronchiectasis, and type 1 diabetes mellitus and celiac disease. On initial presentation, he had an IgG2 and
IgG4 subclass deficiency, absent antibody response to polysaccharide vaccine, CD4 and NK lymphopenia, and reduced proliferative responses to
PHA. Immunoglobulin substitution was implemented, along with antibiotic prophylaxis, and he was managed successfully on this regimen for
25 years until he died at age 62 years after a cardiac event. Flow cytometric analysis of lymphocytes revealed a significantly diminished γc
expression in both the grandson and grandfather (Fig 1, A; see the Methods section in this article's Online Repository at
www.jacionline.org). Likewise, IL2RG mRNA expression in sorted T and B cells from the grandson showed a 4.2-fold reduction in T cells and a
33-fold reduction in B cells compared with healthy control subjects (Fig 1, B). The T cells were then stimulated with IL-2, IL-7, and IL-15,
and phosphorylated STAT5 levels were determined by means of flow cytometric analysis (Fig 1, C). This was diminished in the patient with a
fold reduction compared with healthy control samples of 3.5-, 7.5-, and 3.8-fold for IL-2, IL-7, and IL-15, respectively. X-inactivation
studies performed on samples from the mother of the grandson demonstrated random X-inactivation in whole blood but apparent nonrandom
X-inactivation in T cells (see Table E2 in this article's Online Repository at www.jacionline.org). Whole-exome sequencing of the grandson
revealed a point mutation, C to T at position g.chrX:71,111,618 (GRCh38), which was located −13 nucleotides upstream of the transcription
start site in the IL2RG gene (ENST00000374202; Fig 1, D). This is situated at an identified binding site for the transcription factor ETS,
which is required for basal promoter activity in cell lines.4 For functional validation, we generated the same mutation in an IL2RG minigene
(Mut.gcPRO and WT.gcPRO), and using a lentiviral vector, introduced this into γc-deficient ED7R cells. We found that γc expression from
Mut.gcPRO was dramatically abrogated when compared with the wild-type sequence in a dose-dependent manner. When transduced at similar
efficiency (similar vector copy numbers), there is an 8-fold difference in γc expression between the WT-gcPRO and Mut-gcPRO transduced cells
(Fig 1, E). To confirm that the mutation abrogated binding of ETS, using the electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we showed that mutant
oligonucleotides were unable to form a normal protein/DNA complex (Fig 2). More than 100 mutations in IL2RG have been described extending
across all of its 8 exons, intron/exon boundaries, and 3′ regulatory regions.4 Although most of the known mutations result in a classical
immunophenotype of T−B+NK− SCID, variants leading to a T−B+NK+ SCID and TlowB+NK+ have been described.5, 6 Attenuated SCID phenotypes have
also been observed as a result of splice-site mutations resulting in diminished expression of truncated γc protein or as a result of somatic
reversion.5, 6, 7 Here we identified a novel point mutation at nucleotide −13 upstream of the transcription start site in a putative ETS-
binding site.3 ETS transcription factors comprise a large evolutionarily conserved family characterized by sequence homology within their
DNA-binding domain that bind to sequences containing a consensus GGAA/T motif.8 The ETS transcription factors have been linked with diverse
biological processes, including hematopoiesis, T-cell survival, and NK cell production.9 Previous studies have shown that an ETS-binding
site in a 1053-bp fragment 5′ to the IL2RG transcription initiation site is essential for tissue-specific basal promoter activity of IL2RG.3
Our data indicate that a point mutation within the ETS-binding site of the proximal IL2RG promoter has a significant detrimental effect on
its activity in human subjects. The residual expression of γc appears to differentially affect signaling through the cytokine receptors
leading to normal T-cell development, with minimal reduction in T-cell function and absent NK cell development. In this family this resulted
in an initial presentation akin to CVID, manifesting with recurrent bacterial and viral infections. This scenario should be considered in
male patients with antibody deficiency, particularly if accompanied by NK lymphopenia. These patients should also be monitored closely for
more serious manifestations because this defect is amenable to correction by means of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation or gene
therapy. Furthermore, our finding highlights the potential role of mutations in gene regulatory regions as a cause of significant primary
immunodeficiencies. All material from patients was obtained with informed consent from adults and from the parents of children who
participated in the study in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and with approvals from the ethics committees of Cambridge
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and Royal Free Hospital and Medical School (REC 04/Q0501/119). A subset of T and B cells from
control and patient samples were obtained by incubating PBMCs with anti-CD3 and anti-CD19 antibodies conjugated with magnetic microbeads
(Miltenyi Biotec, Surrey, United Kingdom). Then the cells were separated with the autoMACS Pro Separator (Miltenyi Biotec). Total RNA was
extracted from sorted T and B cells by using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), according to the manufacturer's instructions. The
cDNA was synthesized with the QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen). First, RNA (100 ng) was incubated with genomic DNA Wipeout
Buffer at 42°C for 5 minutes. Then Reverse Transcription master mix containing RT primer and Quantiscript Reverse Transcriptase (Qiagen) was
added to the RNA. The reaction was then incubated for 15 minutes at 42°C, followed by 3 minutes at 95°C to inactive reverse transcriptase.
Quantitative PCR was performed with an ABI 7000 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, United Kingdom). The primer
sequences for IL2RG were as follows: forward, 5-TGCTAAAACTGCAGAATCTGGT -3; reverse, 5-AGCTGGGATTCACTCAGTTTG-3. The IL2RG probe sequence was
5-CCTGGGCTCCAGAGAACCTAACA-TAMRA-3. The primer sequences for the human β-actin gene were as follows: forward, 5-TCACCCACACTGTGCCCATCTACGA-3;
reverse, 5-CAGCGGAACCGCTCATTGCCAATGG-3. The β-actin probe sequence was 5-FAM-ATGCCCTCCCCCATGCCA TCCTGCGT-TAMRA-3. The average cycle
threshold (Ct) values for IL2RG from quantitative PCR were normalized with the average Ct value of β-actin to give rise to the ΔCt, which is
used to calculate the ΔΔCt value. Then the 2−ΔΔCt values for healthy control subjects and patients were deduced from the ΔΔCt value.
Quantitative PCR was run in duplicates in 3 independent experiments. Two different controls were used. The mutant IL2RG promoter was
generated by using the QuikChange Lightning Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Agilent Technologies, Wokingham, Berkshire, United Kingdom). The
lentiviral vector containing the wild-type IL2RG promoter driving codon optimized IL2RG (lenti-gcPRO.gc.co)E1 was used as the parental
sequence. The primer sequences used in PCR were as follows: forward, 5-ggttctttccactggaagctatgacag-3; reverse,
5-ctgtcatagcttccagtggaaagaacc-3. The PCR reaction was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. PCR product was then incubated
with DpnI enzyme at 37°C for 5 minutes to digest parental plasmid DNA. Digested PCR product of 2 μL was transformed into XL10-Gold cells
provided within the kit, according to the protocol. The plasmids prepared from single colonies were then sequenced to confirm introduction
of the point mutation within the IL2RG promoter and to obtain the lenti-mut.gcPRO.gc.co construct. Lentivirus was produced by means of
transient cotransfection of HEK293T cells with 3 plasmids, the lentiviral vectors for lenti-gcPRO.gc.co and lenti-mut.gcPRO.gc.co, pMD.G2
(envelope plasmid), and pCMV_8.91 (packaging plasmid, both produced by Plasmid Factory, Bielefeld, Germany), by using polyethylenimine
(Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, Mo), as previously described.E2 Mouse fibroblast SC-1 cells were transduced with serial dilutions of virus.
Genomic DNA was isolated from transduced cells by using the DNeasy Kit (Qiagen). Viral vector copy number was determined by using
quantitative PCR. The primers for the lentiviral vector were as follows: forward, 5-CAGGACTCGGCTTGCTGAAG-3; reverse, 5-TCCCCCGCT
TAATACTGACG-3. The probe for lentiviral vector was 5-FAM-CGCACGGCA AGA GGC GAG G TAMRA-3. The primer sequences for the mouse housekeeping
titin gene (Ttn) were as follows: forward, 5-AAAACGAGCAGTGACCTGAGG-3; reverse, 5-TTCAG TCATGCTGCTAGCGC-3. The Ttn probe sequence was 5-FAM-
TGCACGGAATCTCGTCTC AGTC-TAMRA-3. ED7R cells derived from an adult human T-cell leukemia line deficient in IL2RG gene expression were
cultured in RPMI 1640 plus 10% FCS. The cells were seeded into 12-well plates (105 cells/well) and transduced with the lenti-gcPRO.gc.co or
lenti-MutgcPRO.gc.co viruses at different multiplicities of infection. On day 3 after transduction, half of the transduced cells were
resuspended in 100 μL of fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer (0.5% BSA/PBS) containing 0.5 μL of anti–human IL2RG (BD
Biosciences, San Jose, Calif) and incubated for 30 minutes at 4°C. The cells were then washed with FACS buffer, and IL2RG expression was
analyzed by using FACS. Half of the transduced cells were pelleted for extraction of genomic DNA, and the vector copy numbers were
determined by using quantitative PCR, as described above. The housekeeping gene albumin was used as the internal reference gene. The
primers/probes used for the lentivirus vector is the same as the above. The primers for the human albumin gene were as follows: forward,
5-GCT GCT ATC TCT TGT GGG CTG T; reverse, 5-ACT CAT GGG AGC TGC TGG TTC. The albumin probe was 5′-VIC-CCT GTC ATG CCC ACA CAA ATC TCT CC-
TAMRA-3. Three microliters of anti-human IL2RG (BD Biosciences) or matched isotype control (BD Biosciences) was added to 100 μL of blood
incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature. Red blood cells were lysed with FACsLyse (BD Biosciences) for 10 minutes and then washed with
Cell Wash (BD Biosciences) before being fixed (FACsFix, BD Bioscience). Ten thousand lymphocytes were acquired (FACSCalibur, BD Biosciences)
and analyzed (CellQuest Pro, BD Biosciences). IL-2 (1 × 104 IU/mL; Chiron, Austin, Tex), IL-7 (100 ng/mL; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, Minn),
or IL-15 (50 ng/mL, R&D Systems) was added to 100 μL of whole blood and placed at 37°C for 10 minutes to stimulate cells. Two milliliters of
prewarmed FACsLyse/Fix (BD Biosciences) was then added to the blood, mixed, and placed at 37°C for 10 minutes. The cells were pelleted and
washed once with STAT wash (PBS containing 1% FCS). The cells were resuspended in cold Perm Buffer III (BD Biosciences) and placed at 4°C
for 30 minutes. The cells were then washed once with STAT wash before 5 μL of antibody (STAT5 ptyr and CD4 peridinin-chlorophyll-protein
complex ; BD Biosciences) was added, and the cells were incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark, washed with STAT wash, and
fixed (FACsFix, BD Biosciences). Ten thousand lymphocyte events were acquired (FACsCalibur, BD Biosciences) and analyzed with CellQuest
software (BD Biosciences). Nuclear proteins were extracted from Jurkat and ED7R cells by using the NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction
kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Mass), according to the manufacturer's instructions. The extracted nuclear proteins were then placed in
aliquots and stored at −80°C. A 38-bp oligonucleotide was chosen from the IL2RG promoter covering the Ets-binding region with the following
sequences: wild-type, 5′ ATA AGG TTC TTT CCA CCG GAA GCT ATG ACA GAG GAA AC; mutant, 5′ ATA AGG TTC TTT CCA CTG GAA GCT ATG ACA GAG GAA AC.
The oligonucleotides were synthesized and HPLC purified by Invitrogen (Carlsbad, Calif). Biotin labeling of the oligonucleotides was
performed by using the Biotin 3′ End DNA Labeling Kit (Thermo Scientific), according to the manufacturer's instructions. The labeled
oligonucleotides were purified with chloroform:isoamyl alcohol. An equal molar-labeled sense and antisense oligonucleotide was annealed in
10 mmol/L Tris, 1 mmol/L EDTA, and 50 mmol/L NaCl at 95°C for 5 minutes and then −1°C/cycle down to 59°C, followed for 30 minutes at 59°C,
and then −1°C/cycle down to 20°C in the thermocycler. The same annealing process was also applied to the unlabeled oligonucleotides. The
binding assay was performed with the LightShift Chemiluminescent Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific), according to
the manufacturer's instructions. The binding reaction contained 1 × binding buffer, 2.5% glycerol, 5 mmol/L MgCl2, 50 ng/μL Poly(dI*Dc)
0.05% NP-40, 4 pmol of unlabeled oligos (200 × excess), and 20 fmol of biotin-labeled oligonucleotides in a total volume of 20 μL. The
reaction was incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes and then loaded onto a 6% DNA retardation TBE gel (Invitrogen). After
electrophoresis, the gel was transferred to the nylon membrane (Invitrogen). The membrane was then UV cross-linked for 12 minutes and
incubated in blocking buffer for 15 minutes, followed by incubation with streptavidin–horseradish peroxidase in blocking buffer. The
membrane was then washed with 1 × wash buffer, followed by Substrate Equilibration Buffer (Thermo Scientific). Finally, the membrane was
incubated with Substrate Working buffer for 5 minutes before exposure with the CCD camera. X-inactivation studies were performed by the
North East Regional Genetics Laboratory on DNA from whole blood and magnetically separated T cells (anti-CD3 beads and autoMACs, Miltenyi
Biotec), as previously described.E3 This analyzes methylation at the androgen receptor locus. Briefly, extracted DNA was incubated with or
without the restriction enzyme HpaII, amplified, and analyzed on a sequencing gel. In female subjects with random X-inactivation, 2 bands
are detected, and only 1 band is detected in those with nonrandom X-inactivation. Immunophenotyping of lymphocyte populations was performed
by using flow cytometry. Whole blood was labeled with combinations of mAbs conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC), phycoerythrin
(PE), allophycocyanin (APC), PerCP, or fluorochrome combinations with cyanines (PerCP-Cy5.5, APC-Cy7, and PE-Cy7; BD Biosciences).
Lymphocyte subsets were detected by using a 6-color multitest reagent containing CD3 FITC, CD16+CD56 PE, CD45 PerCP-Cy5.5, CD19 APC, CD4 PE-
Cy7, and CD8-APC-Cy7. Naive, effector, and memory T-cell populations were detected with CD45RA FITC, CD27 PE, CD45 PerCP, and CD4 or CD8
APC. Naive, memory, and switched B-cell populations were detected by using CD19 PE-Cy7, CD27 PE, IgD FITC, and IgM Cy5. Staining was
analyzed on a FACSCanto II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). Immunoglobulin levels were measured with a Dade Behring (Milton Keynes, United
Kingdom) nephelometer (BNII), according to the manufacturer's instructions. PBMCs (5 × 105) were seeded onto a 96-well plate in RPMI
containing 5% human AB serum. Mitogens (CD3 and PHA) or antigen (Candida species) were added to the wells in a final volume of 200 μL.
A minimum of 3 replicates were performed on each sample, with a healthy control subject. Four days later, plates treated with mitogens were
pulsed with 1 μCi/mL tritiated thymidine for 4 hours. Antigen plates were pulsed after 6 days, cells were harvested, and thymidine
incorporation was measured on a scintillation counter. Library preparation, exome capture, and sequencing have been done according to the
manufacturers' instructions. For exome target enrichment, the Agilent SureSelect 50 Mb kit (Agilent, Santa Clara, Calif) was used.
Sequencing was done with the Illumina HiSeq with 94-bp paired-end reads. Reads from raw FASTQ files were aligned to the hg19 reference
genome by using NovoAlign, version 2.08.03 (Novocraft Technologies, Selangor, Malaysia). Duplicate reads were marked with picard tools mark
duplicates. Calling was performed with the haplotype caller module of GATK (https://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk), creating gVCF formatted
files for each sample. The individual gVCF files were combined into gVCF files containing 100 samples each. The final variant calling was
performed with the GATK “GenotypegVCFs” module used jointly for all patients and control subjects. Variant quality scores were then
recalibrated according to GATK best practices separately for indels and single nucleotide polymorphisms. Resulting variants were annotated
with ANNOVAR.Table E1Summary of immunologic investigations in the patientsInvestigationGrandson 44 y (normal range)Grandson 4 y (normal
range)CD3+ cells (109/L)0.83 (0.7-2.1)4.34 (0.9-4.5)CD19+ cells (109/L)0.01 (0.1-0.5)1.10 (0.2-2.1)CD16+CD56+ cells (109/L)0.00
(0.09-0.6)0.00 (0.1-1.0)CD3+CD4+ cells (109/L)0.25 (0.3-1.4)2.86 (0.5-2.4)CD3+CD8+ cells (109/L)0.53 (0.2-0.9)1.21 (0.3-1.6)γδ T cells
(109/L)0.031.39Naive CD4+ T cells (CD27+CD45RA+)50% (>50%)Naive CD8+ T cells (CD27+CD45RA+)61% (>50%)PHA, 0 μg/mL (mean CPM)6857PHA, 4 μg/ml
(mean CPM)3,859 (>12,000)10,909 (>12,000)CD3 background (mean CPM)167183CD3 stimulated (mean CPM)484 (>7,500)3,952 (>7,500)Candida species
background (mean CPM)630904Candida species stimulated (mean CPM)5,274 (>12,500)9,252 (>12,500)IgG (g/L)7.2 (6-13)1.8 (4.9-16.1)IgG1
(g/L)4.66 (3.1-8.9)IgG2 (g/L)0.58 (1.4-5.5)IgG3 (g/L)0.26 (0.04-1.07)IgG4 (g/L)0.00 (0.01- 0.93)IgA (g/L)2.3 (0.8-3.7)1.0 (0.4-2.0)IgM
(g/L)2.4 (0.4-2.2)0.5 (0.5-2.0)CD4+ TRECs per million T cells19,057 (>20,000)CD8+ TRECs per million T cells34,125 (>20,000)Naive B cells
(IgD+IgM+CD27−)98% (70% to 90%)Anti-tetanus antibody (IU/mL)<10 IU (undetectable)0.28 (protective range)Anti-pneumococcal antibody<10 IU
(undetectable); no response on immunization220 before immunization/352 after immunization (640 units of range for unimmunized subject)Anti-
rubella antibody4 (>10)Anti–varicella zoster antibody43 (>20)Anti-mumps antibodyIgG positiveAnti-measles antibody1.4 (detectable)Anti-HiB
antibody (μg/mL)2.17 before immunization/>14 after immunization (optimal >1)CPM, Counts per minute; TRECs, T-cell receptor excision
circles.Table E2X-inactivation studies of the 3 generations in the familyRelationshipAR (CAG)n−HpaIIAR (CAG)n+HpaIIConclusionSon
(grandson)272NAHigh-risk X-chromosomeMother of grandsonWhole blood 272, 292T cells 272, 292272, 292272Nonrandom X- inactivation in
T cellsGrandfather272High-risk X-chromosome Summary of immunologic investigations in the patients CPM, Counts per minute; TRECs, T-cell
receptor excision circles. X-inactivation studies of the 3 generations in the family We thank Niek P. van Til, Department of Hematology,
Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, for providing the wild-type gcPRO plasmid. S.N. is a Wellcome Trust Senior
Research Fellow in Basic Biomedical Science (095198/Z/10/Z). S.N. is also supported by the European Research Council Starting grant 260477
and the EU FP7 collaborative grant 261441 (PEVNET project) and a National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Cambridge Biomedical Research
Centre. F.Z. is funded by an EU FP7 grant: CELL-PID—Advanced Cell-based therapies for the treatment of primary immunodeficiencies (reference
no. FP7-261387). A.C. has a Wellcome Trust Postdoctoral Training Fellowship for Clinicians (103413/Z/13/Z). A.J.T. is a Wellcome Trust
Principal Fellow. Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: A. Chandra and D. S. Kumararatne received travel support from Shire. S. O.
Burns received travel support from Immunodeficiency Canada, CSL Behring. and Baxalta US. The rest of the authors declare that have no
relevant conflicts of interest. Reduced IL2RG expression and function. A and B, Common γc expression on lymphocytes (Fig 1, A) in a control
subject (CON), the grandson (GS), and the grandfather (GF), as well as IL2RG mRNA expression (Fig 1, B). C, Phosphorylated STAT5 (pSTAT5)
expression after stimulation with cytokines (dark gray) or unstimulated (light gray). Mean fluorescence intensities are shown in
parentheses. D, Illustration of the point mutation in the IL2RG promoter with the ETS consensus sequence underscored. E, Expression of
common γc after transduction of ED7R cells. The vector copy number (VCN) per cell is shown. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Biotin-
labeled wild-type or mutant oligonucleotides incubated without nuclear extracts (lanes 1 and 4), with nuclear extracts (lanes 2, 3, 5, and
6), and in the absence (lanes 2 and 5) or presence (lanes 3 and 6) of an excess of unlabeled oligonucleotides. A supershift DNA/protein
complex band is detected and marked. The free-labeled oligonucleotide is indicated.
