Sarcoidosis is a multisystemic disorder of unknown etiology which is characterized by the formation of non-caseating granulomas in involved
tissues. Cardiac involvement is one of the least common manifestations and it can occur at any point of time during the course of
sarcoidosis. Here we present the case of 2 patients with known sarcoidosis who develop cardiac abnormalities in the absence of known primary
cardiac cause. In our report, we would like to draw attention to the importance of considering heart involvement in any case with systemic
sarcoidosis especially in young age. Sarcoidosis, an enigmatic multisystemic disease, is characterized by the formation of granulomas in
many tissues mainly the lungs, the lymphoreticular system, the eyes, and the skin, with cardiac involvement being a rare entity . Many
reports showed that the quoted incidence of heart involvement in sarcoidosis in their review was around 2%, so that it was one of the least
common manifestations . The clinical sequelae of cardiac sarcoidosis vary from asymptomatic conduction abnormalities to heart failure, fatal
ventricular arrhythmias, and sudden death. Foregoing data, early diagnosis and prompt treatment are essential since they can improve
prognosis by reducing the chances of sudden death. A 40-year-old Tunisian woman, with a history of diabetes mellitus in diet and Lofgren's
syndrome (an acute presentation consisting of polyarthralgia, erythema nodosum, bilateral intrathoracic lymphadenopathies) diagnosed in
February 2013, came to our department, in February 2014, for exploration of exertional dyspnea of one month evolution and progressively
worsening without fever, chest pain, or syncope. The patient denied any past history of hypertension, coronary artery, or thyroid disease.
She did not smoke or consume alcohol. On physical examination, she was conscious, cooperative, and afebrile. She was hemodynamically stable
(blood pressure (BP) 130/70 mmHg and had a regular pulse of 88 beats /minute.). She had good color and was slightly polypneic with no
peripheral cyanosis (peripheral oxygen saturation 97%). She presented no palpable adenopathy or signs of jugular distension. Cardiac
auscultation revealed rhythmic sounds with no murmur or friction rub. There were no signs of peripheral edema or deep vein thrombosis.
Pulmonary, abdominal, and neurological examination revealed no abnormalities. The admission electrocardiogram (ECG) was normal. On
investigation, blood biochemistry, liver, renal function, thyroid function and, hemogram showed no abnormalities except lymphopenia. Her
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) level was 132 units (normal range < 68units). The immunological markers were negative. A contrast-
enhanced computed tomography (CT) chest scan showed almost complete regression of mediastinal lymphadenopathies without pleuroparenchymal
lesion. Respiratory functional tests and bronchoscopy with transbronchial lung biopsy were normal. The transthoracic echocardiography with
Doppler showed abnormal left ventricular relaxation and systolic dysfunction of the left ventricle with ventricular ejection fraction (EF)
of 40%. In the light of these symptoms and echocardiographic abnormalities, for which other possible causes have been excluded, the
diagnosis of sarcoidosis with heart involvement was suspected. Thus, more specialized cardiac evaluation was needed. 24 hour holter
monitoring showed recurrent episodes of 2000 monomorphic ventricular extrasystoles. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium
contrast showed evidence of delayed hyper enhancement in both the basal and inferolateral left ventricular regions, suspicious for
fibrogranulomatous tissue of sarcoidosis (Figure 1). The left ventricular ejection fraction was 40%. Laboratory tests confirmed negative
serial markers of myocardial necrosis. Technetium99m sestamibi scintigraphy myocardial perfusion study showed decreased uptake in the
inferolateral and apical ventricular myocardium, which was reversible during stress (reverse distribution) (Figure 2). Coronary angiography
and let ventriculography showed angiographically normal coronary arteries. Considering all these clinical and investigatioanal findings in a
patient with a history of Lofgren's syndrome and in the absence of primary heart disease, the diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis was made. The
patient started with a dose of 1mg/kg/day of corticosteroids in addition to supportive care. This dose was tapered gradually to a
maintenance level of 15 mg per day over 5 months. To this day, evolution was favorable. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with
gadolinium contrast: evidence of delayed hyper enhancement (arrow) in both the basal and inferolateral left ventricular regions Decreased
uptake in the inferolateral and apical ventricular myocardium, which was reversible during stress (reverse distribution) shown on
Technetium99m sestamibiscintigraphy myocardial perfusion study A 48-year-old Tunisian woman, presented to our consultations with a history
of intermittent palpitations and exertional dyspnea of 4 months duration, progressively worsening for 2 weeks before, without any history of
chest pain or syncope. She had a past history of systemic sarcoidosis diagnosed in April 2009 on the basis of the following compatible
clinical and radiologic findings: systemic symptoms (such as fatigue, anorexia, and weight loss), parotid enlargement, negative tuberculin
skin test, lymphopenia, hypercalciuria, increased serum ACE level, intrathoracic lymphadenopathies which were hilar (Figure 3), bilateral
symmetrical, and associated with right paratracheal window lymph node involvement. Pulmonary functions tests demonstrated decreased volumes
and CO diffusing capacity. Lymphocytosis in broncho-alveolar lavage was observed and a CD4+/CD8+ lymphocyte ratio was greater than 3.5. Lip
biopsy of accessory salivary glands was compatible with grade 1 according to Chisholm's classification. After ruling out the other
granulomatous diseases such as tuberculosis, lymphoma, crohn's disease, Wegner granulomatosis…, the diagnosis of systemic sarcoisosis was
ascertained. A short-course corticosteroid therapy with antimalarial drug were initiated with a favorable evolution both clinically and
radiogically. The patient was presented in November 2011 with a history of intermittent palpitations and exertionaldyspnea of 4 months
duration, progressively worsening for 2 weeks before. She denied any history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease and
thyroid disease. She did not smoke, consume alcohol, or illicit drugs. On physical examination, she was conscious, cooperative, and
afebrile. She had a BP of 120/70 mmHg and a pulse of 160 beats/minute. There were no signs of cardiac failure; the rest of the physical
examination did not reveal any abnormal findings. She was admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit. The admission ECG showed a
ventricular tachycardia at 160 cycles/minute. In the light of these typical symptoms and electrocardiographic alterations in a patient
having systematic sarcoidosis, the diagnosis of sarcoidosis with cardiac involvement was suspected. The echocardiography showed a FE of 50%,
bright shadows consisting with infiltration in the basal and inferoseptal ventricular myocardium, and moderate mitral regurgitation.
Coronary angiography revealed normal coronary arteries. The cardiac electrophysiology study showed a monomorphic ventricular tachycardia
induced by isoproterenol. Laboratory tests showed no relevant alterations in myocardial necrosis biomarkers, blood cell count, renal and
liver function, or electrolytes. Given the absence of primary heart disease that would explain the cardiac abnormalities and especially the
previous diagnosis of systemic sarcoidosis, the final diagnosis was sarcoidosis with cardiac involvement. The patient started with a dose of
1 mg/kg/day of corticosteroid, in addition to supportive care. Over 8 months, the steroids were tapered to a dose of 10 mg/day. Anti
arrhythmic drug therapy (Amiodarone) and β blocker were initiated. Given the recurrent ventricular tachycardia with amiodarone, we proceeded
to the implantation of an automated implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD). Evolution was favorable. High-resolution computed
tomography scan of the chest showing peribronchial and bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy (arrows) Sarcoidosis is a multisystemic disorder of
unknown etiology which is characterized by the formation of non-caseating granulomas in involved tissues. To this day, it remains something
of enigma, the search for an etiologic agent is ongoing . Sarcoidosis can be widespread or limited to involvement of only a single system at
a time, it most commonly involves the lungs, the lymph nodes of the thorax and the eye, despite the fact that virtually no organ systems are
immune to infiltration by sarcoid granulomas. Cardiac involvement is one of the least common manifestations and it can occur at any point of
time during the course of sarcoidosis. Vishal S et al reported that the incidence of clinical heart involvement was as approximately 5%,
wheras at autopsy, the incidence was considerably higher (20 to 25%) . Making a diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis remains one of the main
challenges in the management of the disease: in fact, if cardiac manifestations occur in patients with multisystemic sarcoidosis, the
diagnosis, although circumstancial, is strongly suspected, which is in keeping with our 2 cases. However, when cardiac dysfunction is the
only manifestation of sarcoidosis, the diagnosis is frequently not entertained. Clinical manifestations of cardiac sarcoidosis, ranging from
asymptomatic conduction abnormalities to fatal ventricular arrhythmia or sudden death, are dependent on both the profusion and location of
granulomas. Granulomas can involve the left ventricular free wall, basal ventricular septum, right ventricle, papillary muscle, right
atrium, and left atrium . Main relevant signs include complete heart block, ventricular tachycardia, supra ventricular arrhythmias (atrial
flutter, fibrillation and paroxysmal atrial tachycardia), congestive heart failure, and sudden death. Other clinical manifestations may
involve chest pain, electrocardiographic changes, and pericardial abnormalities (pericardial effusion, constrictive pericarditis, tamponade)
. Despite the fact that endomyocardial biopsy is theoretically the most confident mean to assert the diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis, it is
an invasive procedure which lacks sensitivity: cardiac involvement tends to be patchy and granulomas are more likely to be located in the
left ventricle and basal ventricular septum than in the right ventricle where endomyocardial biopsies are usually performed . Thus, serial
ECG during evolution survey, echocardiography, 24-h Holter monitoring of ECG, MRI with gadolinium contrast, technetium99m-sestamibi
scintigraphy myocardial perfusion study, and coronary angiography can be helpful tools for diagnosis. However, all these complementary exams
lack specificity for the disease . Thus, in 1993, guidelines for the diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis have been published by the Japanese
Ministry of Health and Welfare . The 2 cases presented fulfill the diagnostic criteria set out in these guidelines (Table 1): cardiac
abnormalities in the absence of primary heart disease with a previous diagnosis of intrathoracic sarcoidosis in the first case and Löfgren's
syndrome in the second case. The clinical response to the treatment prescribed also supports our diagnosis suspicion. The Japanese Ministry
of Health and Welfare 1993 guidelines for the diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis Considering the increased risk of sudden death, cardiac
sarcoidosis is an indication for early treatment. Steroids should be started as soon as possible: many reports showed that, in early or
middle stage disease, steroid therapy may be protective or therapeutic but may not be as effective in the late stages . In both our cases,
treatment was started at the middle stage of the disease and a favorable response was noted. The recommended starting dose seems to be 60 to
80 mg a day of prednisone, it can be tapered over 6 months to a dose of 10 mg a day . Antiarrhythmic drugs and β blockers are also usually
used in the management of cardiac sarcoidosis. To our knowledge, there have been no prospective studies evaluating the use of these
medications in patients having cardiac sarcoidosis. Amiodarone can be responsible for the occurrence of pulmonary fibrosis. These drug-
induced pulmonary changes, which are indistinguishable radiographically from pulmonary sarcoidosis, may threaten the patient's respiratory
status. Consequently, we must carefully and constantly assess the potential benefits and risks of prescribing such medications. Regarding
the treatment with ICD, it seems necessary in patients with refractory ventricular tachyarrhythmia who are at risk of sudden death in
addition to antiarrhythmic drugs. Some authors recommended ICD implantation in any patient with sarcoidosis and non-sustained ventricular
tachyarrhythmia because of the high rate of recurrence of ventricular tachycardia despite medical treatment [8, 9]. As for cardiac
transplantation, it is rare and remains the only possibility for younger patients with severe and stage irreversible cardiac failure or
resistant VT . The prognosis of cardiac sarcoidosis remains obscure: early necropsy series concluded that survival in most patients with
symptomatic cardiac sarcoidosis was limited to about 2 years , while better outcomes were noted in other series where 5-year survival rate
was 40-60%. Whether this improvement in prognosis was due to early disease recognition or a milder form of cardiac sarcoidosis versus early
institution of medication remains to be determined. With progress in prevention and treatment of ventricular arrhythmias, the primary cause
of death in cardiac sarcoidosis has changed from sudden death to congestive heart failure. Cardiac sarcoidosis should always be suspected in
any patient who is younger than expected presenting with cardiac symptoms without evidence of primary heart disease particularly if he has
already been diagnosed with sarcoidosis. To date, early diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis remains a challenge because clinical manifestations
are non specific and the diagnostic modalities lack sensitivity and specificity in spite of recent advances. A negative endomyocardial
biopsy should in no way be regarded as evidence of absence of cardiac sarcoidosis, especially if diagnostic suspicion is strong. Cardiac
sarcoidosis is on occasion a medical emergency that may lead to sudden death due to the rhythm disturbances or progressive heart failure
from a dilated cardiomyopathy; therefore, in addition to corticosteroid treatment, early consideration for implantation of an ICD should be
a priority. The authors declare no competing interests. Authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
