The aim of this report is to present a rare case of a Ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma (GCOC) of a 21-year-old man with review of the
literature. The patient was treated surgically, and one of the surgical margins was involved, the patient received adjuvant radiotherapy for
local control. Five months later, patient presented with infraorbital lesion which was proven histological to be GCOC. Radiological images,
histological sections and clinical photographs are also presented. One year after the second surgery, the patient was tumor free. The only
effective treatment modality was surgical removal. Ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma (GCOC) is extremely rare with only 30 case reports in
the English literature . This disease has unpredictable biological behavior which may arise de novo or from preexisting calcifying cystic
odontogenic tumor (CCOT) . GCOC was so called because of the presence of keratinized ghost cells in association with ameloblastomatous
epithelial component and a CCOT with frank malignant counterpart. In general odontogenic tumors are rare neoplasms when compared to non-
odontogenic tumors in the oral cavity. According to Adebayo et al , the odontogenic neoplasms represent (32%) of tumors and tumor-like
lesions of the oral and perioral structures. Of these, malignant odontogenic carcinomas represent 1%. A 21 year old male non tobacco user
with a history of surgical removal of a small mass started after tooth extraction. The swelling reappeared again, and the patient was
referred from a peripheral dental clinic to the department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery-Khartoum Teaching Dental Hospital. He was
complaining of swelling at the left side of the maxilla of 2-years duration and difficulties in eating and mouth closure associated with
mild pain and facial deformity. The swelling increased gradually in size with itching sensation and teeth mobility. The past medical
history, family history, personal history and drug history were noncontributory. On extra oral examination there was a solitary, bony hard,
painless, diffuse swelling of approximately 10x10 cm on the left side of the face obliterating the nasolabial fold with intact overlying
skin. Careful clinical examination did not reveal any occult lesions or cervical lymphadenopathy Intraorally, a solitary swelling, causing
obliteration of left buccal vestibule with overlying indurated mucosa and palatal expansion was noted. No pus or bloody discharge was seen
(Figure 1). Computer Tomographic (CT) Scan showed ill-defined mass with scattered radiopacities (Figure 2). No further lesions were detected
in CT views, and there was no evidence of metastatic disease on chest radiograph or abdominal ultrasound. Histological examination of the
incisional biopsy was suggestive of odontogenic carcinoma. The lesion was excised via an extra-oral approach (modified Weber Fergusson
incision) with safety margins. The excisional biopsy showed an epithelial tumor with both cystic and solid components consisting of basaloid
ameloblast-like cells displaying peripheral palissading. Numerous collections of ghost cells and areas rich in foreign body type giant cells
were noted. The epithelial cells have increased mitotic activity with many abnormal mitotic figures. The surrounding tissue showed fibrosis
and bone destruction. The periphery of tumor nests showed neovascularization. The diagnosis of GCOC was made (Figure 3, Figure 4, Figure 5,
Figure 6, Figure 7). Diffused swelling on the left side of face obliterating the nasolabial fold Axial section CT scan showed left maxillary
expansion with mixed radiolucency The tumor here displaying mainly a cystic component with central hemorrhage and necrosis The same tumor
displaying both the cystic and solid component H & E stain the tumor shows the basaloid epithelial element and numerous collections of ghost
cells with areas displaying increased mitosis High power image showing an area consisting mainly of ghost cells with few intervening
epithelial component This figure shows numerous ghost cells with foreign body giant cell reaction One of the surgical margins was involved,
namely infrorbial rim, so the patient was subsequently referred to the radio-isotope center for adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy for
local control. The patient received external-beam radiotherapy in the form of 3 fields: 2 lateral wedged and one anterior - similar to
conventional radiotherapy to the maxilla. The patient received 50 Gray / 25 F / 5 weeks by Linear Accelerator - 6 MV. Five months later, the
patient presented with swelling in the left infra-orbital area. Histological examination of an excisional biopsy revealed an epithelial
tumor of the same features of the previous tumor with less ghost cell component. One year later, at the time of reporting the case,
unfortunately, the patient passed away and he was disease free. GCOC is an uncommon neoplasm and was first described in 1985 as well
documented case report by Ikumra et al . It is considered as malignant variant of odontogenic ghost cell tumor (OGCT) or calcified
odontogenic cyst (COC) . As the term “Ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma” underlines, Odontogenic because of ameloblast like cell, Ghost “due
to the presence of shadows of keratinized epithelial cells with wet keratin”. Various names were applied to this tumor including malignant
COC, Ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma, aggressive epithelial ghost cell odontogenic tumor, dentinogenic ghost cell ameloblastoma, carcinoma
arising in a COC, and malignant calcifying ghost cell odontogenic tumor . It is more common in males with an age peak at the fourth decade
of life (2). Most of GCOC occurred within the maxilla. Clinical presentation varies with painful swelling and paresthesia being the most
common complaint. Facial swelling is also common finding . The geographical distribution of GCOC is prominent in Asia and was attributed to
the fact that COC is more common in Asian and the GCOC may arise from the lining of the cyst or malignant transformation of benign tumor .
Radiologically, the lesion most commonly seen as a mixed radiolucency and radiopacity with ill defined margins and tooth displacement or
root resorption although impacted tooth was reported . Histologically, the tumors that are classified as Ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma
may contain both solid and cystic areas although some are completely solid. Microscopically the diagnosis depends on identification of
malignant epithelial tumor with classic features of benign calcifying cystic odontogenic tumor. The malignant component of this tumor
consists of rounded epithelial islands in a fibrous stroma. The epithelial cells are generally small, rounded with hyperchromatic nuclei or
large with vesicular nuclei. Many mitoses are seen. Ghost cells are found in varying numbers either isolated or in clusters . The solid
variant shows greater tendency to develop foreign body granuloma. The treatment of choice is surgical excision with safety margins . The
issue of using chemo or radiotherapy is not clear due to rarity of this tumor. However, in the present case, the radiotherapy was not
effective. The 5 year survival rate was estimated to be 73%, and the recurrence is common . Therefore, periodic follow up is crucial. Ghost
cell odontogenic carcinoma is a very rare variant of odontogenic carcinoma. It has an aggressive course of growth in bone. Unlike oral
squamous cell carcinoma, the radiotherapy has no role in the treatment of this case and the only effective treatment modality was surgery.
This reflects the importance of obtaining clear surgical margins in surgical excision. The authors declare no competing interests. Elneel
Ahmed Mohamed. Main author. Musadak Ali karrar. Contribute in patient management, drafting of the article and final approval of the version
to be published. Abeer Abdalla El-Siddig, Contribute in pathological diagnosis, drafting of the article and final approval of the version to
be published. Nahla Gafer, Contribute in patient management, drafting of the article and final approval of the version to be published. Ali
Abdel satir, Contributed to the pathological diagnosis, drafting of the article and final approval of the version to be published. All the
authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
