Acute cholecystitis is a rare complication of scrub typhus. Although a few such cases have been reported in patients with scrub typhus, the
clinical course is not well described. Of 12 patients, acute cholecystitis developed in 66.7% (8/12) of patients older than 60 yr. The scrub
typhus group with acute cholecystitis had marginal significant longer hospital stay and higher cost than the group without cholecystitis
according to propensity score matching. Scrub typhus should be kept in mind as a rare etiology of acute cholecystitis in endemic areas
because the typical signs of scrub typhus such as skin rash and eschar can present after the abdominal pain. Scrub typhus is an acute
febrile disease caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi, which is characterized by high fever, maculopapular skin rash, lymphadenopathy, headache,
myalgia, and eschar (1). The symptoms of this disease are usually mild and self-limited; however, it is sometimes accompanied by severe
complications such as pneumonia, acute kidney injury (AKI), acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), meningoencephalitis, shock,
gastrointestinal bleeding, and myocarditis (2345678). Scrub typhus complicated by acute cholecystitis has been rarely reported, and the
clinical course of this complication is not well understood (91011121314). Herein, we conducted a retrospective study to investigate the
characteristics of acute cholecystitis in patients with scrub typhus. We found 12 cases of scrub typhus complicated by acute cholecystitis
and described it with literature review. Additionally, comparison between scrub typhus patients with and without acute cholecystitis was
performed using propensity score matching. The study was approved and performed according to the guidelines of the institutional review
board of Chonbuk National University Hospital (IRB Number: CUH 2013-10-014). Informed consent was waived due to the retrospective nature of
the study. Medical records of subjects who were diagnosed with scrub typhus were evaluated from January 2005 to December 2012 in Chonbuk
National University Hospital. Those patients whose course was complicated by acute cholecystitis were selected and enrolled in this study.
Data collection was also conducted from the following electronic databases: PubMed and website of The Korean Journal of Internal Medicine
(http://www.kaim.or.kr/journal/searchlist.php), including reports up to August 2013. The following words were used for searching: "scrub
typhus" or "tsutsugamushi". Thereafter, cases that described acute cholecystitis as a complication of scrub typhus were assessed. Two
researchers searched the electronic database and collected cases independently using the same searching protocols. We also checked the
references from the retrieved papers to ensure we did not miss any additional cases. When data (e.g. total dates of hospitalization and the
onset of symptoms before admission) were ambiguous, we contacted the authors of the selected articles for clarification. Data from only
fully published papers were included, and those from conferences and abstracts were excluded. The diagnosis of five patients with scrub
typhus in this hospital was confirmed by positive IgM titer ≥ 1:160 against O. tsutsugamushi or a fourfold or greater rise in the indirect
immunofluorescence assay (IFA, Green Cross Reference Lab., Yongin, Korea). Acute cholecystitis in these patients was diagnosed according to
updated Tokyo Guidelines 2013 (15). Appropriate antibiotics included doxycycline and azithromycin for treatment of these patients. The
diagnosis of scrub typhus in the electronic database was confirmed by positive IgM titer ≥1:80 against O. tsutsugamushi or a fourfold or
greater rise in the indirect immunofluorescence assay. The diagnosis of acute cholecystitis was confirmed when the clinical parameters
described in the electronic data met the diagnostic criteria of the updated Tokyo Guidelines 2013. Appropriate antibiotics for the
electronic data included minocycline, doxycycline, or azithromycin (16). The Mann-Whitney U test and Fisher's exact test were used for
continuous and categorical variables. For propensity score matching, cases with malignancy, liver cirrhosis, acute renal failure, chronic
renal failure, severe pulmonary disease, and other immunosuppressive status were excluded. Thereafter, we matched cases and controls using
propensity score matching methods of logistic regression (propensity score was calculated by using age, gender, hypertension, and diabetes
mellitus) and nearest neighbor matching (matching one to three). All analysis was performed using SPSS R extension (IBM SPSS Statistics for
Windows, Version 21.0 and R packages [R 2.14.2]), and P values less than 0.05 were considered significant. We identified 442 patients who
satisfied diagnostic criteria for scrub typhus. Among them, a total of 5 patients (1.1%) were identified to have both acute cholecystitis
and scrub typhus. A total of 1,733 reports were searched in PubMed (n=1,710) and website of The Korean Journal of Internal Medicine (n=23).
A total of 7 subjects were identified as having scrub typhus complicated by acute cholecystitis (91011121314). Of 12 patients, 4 (33.3%)
were male, and the median age was 73.0 yr (interquartile range , 52.8-80.3 yr). Epigastric or right upper quadrant abdominal pain and RUQ
tenderness or Murphy's sign were present in all patients. Acute cholecystitis developed in 66.7% (8/12) of patients older than 60 yr. There
were no deaths due to scrub typhus complicated by acute cholecystitis, although two patients were referred to local hospitals after
withdrawal of care. Leukocytosis (>10,000/µL), elevated creatinine (>1.4 mg/dL), and low albumin (<3.0 g/dL) were found in 33.3% (4/12),
10.0% (1/10), and 33.3% (3/9), respectively. Gallbladder stones or sludge were present in 33.3% (4/12). Of 12 patients, five patients
(41.7%) were diagnosed with acute cholecystitis before the clinical diagnosis or suspicion of scrub typhus, which resulted in delayed
treatment of scrub typhus. Procedures such as percutaneous transhepatic gallbladder drainage or emergent operations were performed in 41.7%
(5/12). One or more complications other than acute cholecystitis, such as pneumonia, AKI, shock, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
(DIC), and ARDS occurred in 83.3% (10/12). The median length of hospitalization of 12 patients was 18.5 days (Table 1, IQR, 14.5-28.3 days).
The median length of hospitalization in the five patients who started proper antibiotics within 6 days after the onset of symptoms was 14.0
days (IQR, 9.5-18.0 days). In contrast, the median length of hospitalization in the six patients who started proper antibiotics more than
seven days after the onset of symptoms was 22.5 days (IQR, 17.8-30.3 days). A comparison of the clinical characteristics of scrub typhus
patients with and without cholecystitis according to propensity score matching was performed to compare hospital duration and cost. The
scrub typhus group with acute cholecystitis had marginally significantly longer hospital duration and higher cost than the group without
cholecystitis (Table 1, P=0.053, P=0.053). Many complications have been reported in patients with scrub typhus including pneumonia, AKI,
ARDS, meningoencephalitis, shock, and myocarditis (2345678). The development of these complications is associated with prolonged
hospitalization and higher medical costs (17). We showed that early diagnosis and treatment with proper antibiotics are very important
because the length of hospitalization was shorter in patients treated with proper antibiotics within seven days. In the previous study, the
mean length of hospitalization in patients with severe scrub typhus was 11.5±9.6 days compared to 7.21±2.8 days in patients with non-severe
scrub typhus (11). Furthermore, it can be assumed that higher medical costs might be paid in patients with acute cholecystitis due to
additional imaging studies, use of various antibiotics, and longer hospital days. In our study, the length of hospitalization and the
medical cost for treating scrub typhus patients complicated by acute cholecystitis were marginally significantly higher than patients
without acute cholecystitis. Although the mechanism of development of acute cholecystitis in scrub typhus is largely unknown, it has been
suggested that systemic vasculitis or perivasculitis caused by O. tsutsugamushi is a likely cause, similar to other complications (10).
Traditionally, old age (>60 yr), male gender, and the presence of cardiovascular disease and diabetes mellitus have been regarded as risk
factors for acute calculous cholecystitis (18). In contrast severe illness causing ischemia of the gall bladder is a risk factor for acute
acalculous cholecystitis (919). As for scrub typhus, old age (>60 yr), elevated creatinine (>1.4 mg/dL), low albumin (<3.0 g/dL), and
leukocytosis (WBC >10,000/µL) have been shown to be associated with the development of various complications in scrub typhus (617). In our
study, old age (>60 yr) was observed in 66.7% (8/12) of patients with scrub typhus complicated by acute cholecystitis, suggesting an
association between old age and the development of acute cholecystitis. Although no deaths were reported, various complications were
observed in most cases. There are several limitations to the present study. First, it was conducted retrospectively at a single referral
center in an area with a high prevalence of Boryong serotype. Therefore, our study may not be applicable to other regions due to geographic
differences. Second, the number of patients was relatively small to confirm our conclusion, although our study suggested that early
diagnosis and medical treatment with appropriate antibiotics are important in scrub typhus patients with acute cholecystitis. In conclusion,
we suggest that acute cholecystitis be considered in patients with scrub typhus who develop epigastric or RUQ pain. Additionally, scrub
typhus should be kept in mind as a rare etiology of acute cholecystitis in endemic areas and seasons because the typical signs of scrub
typhus such as skin rash and eschar can present after the abdominal pain or can even be absent as shown in some cases. Funding: This paper
was supported by research funds from Chonbuk National University in 2015 and by Fund of Biomedical Research Institute, Chonbuk National
University Hospital, Jeonju, Korea. DISCLOSURE: The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION: Study conception
and design: Lee H, Ji M, Hwang JH, Chung KM, Lee CS. Clinical and laboratory data collection: Lee H, Ji M, Lee JY, Hwang JH. Data analysis
and drafting: Lee JH, Chung KM, Lee CS. Revision and approval of manuscript submission: all authors. Data were presented by median
(interquartile range) or number (percentage). *Analyzed by Mann-Whitney U test (age, hospital duration, and hospital cost) or Fisher's exact
test (Gender, DM, and HTN); †Hospital cost (Korean won) was converted to United States dollars according to the 8/18/2014 exchange rate. DM,
diabetes mellitus; HTN, hypertension.
