Interest in the study of adrenocortical carcinoma has greatly increased in the last 12 years. In the last decade, more medical articles
about this subject have been published than in the last 50 years1. Adrenal carcinoma is a rare and aggressive neoplasia and the affected
patients have less than a 50% chance of survival in five years. In the metastatic disease, the survival rate is less than 15%2. It has an
incidence of 0.7 to 0.2 per 1 million people each year with bimodal distribution and it is predominant in females2. The incidence is shown
to be higher in children from the South of Brazil due to environmental and genetic factors3 , 4. It represents 3-6% of all carcinomas3. The
purpose of this report is to relate a patient with morbid obesity that underwent bariatric surgery and after that developed the Cushing's
syndrome caused by an adrenocortical carcinoma. A 54 years old patient was admitted to the endocrinology unit in February 2012. She had a
3-month history of acne, hirsutism, muscle weakness in her lower limbs, increasing levels of hypertension and diabetes mellitus imbalance.
The physical exam revealed a rounded face, clavicular fatness, a fatty hump, BP= 200X100 mmHg, BMI=32.4 kg/m². She had a gastric bypass due
to morbid obesity in 2009, with BMI=52,47 kg/m². Hormonal data were consistent with CS- ACTH independent (Table 1). TABLE 1- Laboratorial
and weight evolution during the patient's follow-up February 2012 May 2012 August 2012 March 2013 References ACTH < 5.033.2 < 5.0 < 5.0<46
pg/mlDHEA-S1410248.619-205 u/dlAndrostenedione>100.324.61>100.40-3.0 ng/ml17 -alpha-OH-progesterone2.140.23297ng/dl **0.19 -1.0
ng/mlSHBG45.60128.256.2018-114 nmol/lFree testosterone6.780.050.4823.750.19 - 2.06 ng/dlTotal testosterone6.550.530.06-0.82 ng/mlUrinary
free cortisol224.118.890.910-90 ug/24 hLDDST* cortisol31.879.7515.23LH<0.119.21.7 - 8.6mUl/ml DHEA-S=plasma dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate;
*LDDST=low dose dexamethasone suppression test; **change in the ng/dl method (VR: 59-344 ng/dl) DHEA-S=plasma dehydroepiandrosterone
sulfate; *LDDST=low dose dexamethasone suppression test; **change in the ng/dl method (VR: 59-344 ng/dl) Abdominal computed tomography
showed an expanding lesion in the left adrenal area of 13.0X9.0 cm, with irregular contour lines and heterogeneous caption of contrast
(Figure 1). She was submitted to a left adrenalectomy and partial nephrectomy in April 2012. Her anatomopathological exam result was 630 g,
size 21X10X 5.0 cm (Figure 2). The pathologic findings were: 15 mitosis in 50 high power fields and the nuclear pleomorphisms was present;
it showed the presence of confluent necrosis and capsular invasion; Ki-67 index was 20% positive according to the immunohistochemical
criteria ; TNM tumor stage was 3-0-0. There was regression of clinical and laboratorial alterations related to the Cushing's syndrome. She
had a follow-up as an outpatient and used mitotane 2 g per day. After seven months, abdominal and thoracic tomography showed recurrence of
the tumor and metastasis in the lungs (Figure 3). FIGURE 1- Abdominal tomography showing adrenal tumor FIGURE 2- Resected adrenal tumor
FIGURE 3 - Adrenal mass As there was no satisfactory response from mitotane, cisplatin and etoposide, her clinical situation worsened and
she died 13 months after having had an adrenalectomy. The patient's daughter has agreed in writing to allow the publication of this study.
Brazil is the country with the second highest numbers of bariatric surgeries and it has the highest number of bariatric surgeons in the
world5. Although Cushing syndrome is a rare cause of obesity, it is supposed that some of the patients that have had bariatric surgery have
it. There are few studies about it in patients with morbid obesity2. Cushing is a disease difficult to diagnose and many times its diagnosis
happens too late6. When hypercortisolism appears, it can be an ACTH - dependent Cushing's syndrome (70 to 80%) or ACTH - independent caused
by adrenocortical tumors or hyperplasia adrenal7 , 8. It is more prevalent in high risk populations such as obese people with poorly
controlled diabetes and its incidence ranges between 3.3 to 5.8% in published studies 8. Screening for Cushing before bariatric surgery has
been suggested in order to avoid a procedure that could be lethal and irreversible as it has already been described8 , 9. There are reports
about it over 9.33% in obese patients10. Approximately 60% of adrenal carcinomas are functioning and 70% are manifested by Cushing syndrome,
associated or not to virilization. Virilization and DHEA-S high levels are more associated to malign tumors11. In those tumors, the symptoms
associated to the glucocorticoids excess develop fast (from 3 to 6 months)2. Patients with higher recurrence risk present a high rate of
malignity in the histology (Ki67 staining of >10% of tumor cells, >20 mitotic figures per 50 high power fields) no matter what the tumor
size and the vascular and capsular invasion12. Ki67 is the most powerful detector of the located or advanced disease and it can guide the
treatment1. Adrenal carcinomas grow very fast and very often they present metastasis in the lungs and liver11. This patient's adrenalectomy
did not show evidence of metastasis. However, after seven months she had a recurrence of the disease and there was lung metastasis. This
case highlights the fact that patients with morbid obesity should be investigated in regard to other endocrinal diseases. Future studies are
needed to evaluate the true Cushing syndrome prevalence in this population10. It is believed that this is the first case reported in the
literature that refers functioning adrenocortical carcinoma which was diagnosed after bariatric surgery. The authors emphasize the
importance of having an endocrinologist in the surgical team, who also diagnoses and treats Cushing syndrome in morbidly obese patients.
