A 10-year-old girl presented with a painless, slow-growing swelling on left pre-auricular region that was noticed for 2 years (Figure 1).
The swelling was bosselated, non-tender, firm-to-hard on palpation, had poorly-defined margin, and measured approximately 3.5cm x 3.0cm. In
addition, it had restricted mobility, and seemed to be of parotid origin, with overlying skin apparently stretched and fixed. The
ultrasonography was unable to delineate the depth and confirm the involvement of the parotid, although fine needle aspiration cytology
(FNAC) suggested pleomorphic adenoma. For this reason, we decided to perform superficial parotidectomy. The histopathology of the lesion
diagnosed pilomatricoma, which is an uncommon, benign ectodermal tumor of dermis/subdermis. Pilomatricoma constitutes a pluripotent cell
expression in the germinal matrix center of hair follicles with differentiation into cortical cells, and the main relevance of its clinical
presence is its potential to be misinterpreted, resulting in unnecessary aggressive interventions. It is often a diagnosis of retrospection.
Some large series reported correct pre-operative diagnosis at 1.1 to 29%.1,2 A careful re-examination of pre-operative image revealed a
subtle bluish tinge, which was not observed presumably because of the dark-skinned complexion, and the characteristic “tent
sign”3perceptible through the already-stretched and bosselated skin surface (Figure 1). Fine needle aspiration cytology is imperative for
the assessment but is often erroneous4 due to inadequate, non-representative sampling from a lesion with complex cell contents. In a typical
example, the basophilic basaloid cells with scanty cytoplasm and indistinct borders encase the anucleated cytoplasm-rich eosinophilic
“ghost/shadow cells” (Figure 2) with areas of keratinization, giant-cells and dystrophic calcification in the matrix. As the tumor gets
older, the central “ghost cells” increase at the expense of the peripheral basophilic cells. Thus, FNAC might have more basophilic cells in
the lesion in early stages while keratinocytes might predominate in later stages, so that the lesion can be misrepresented as malignant in
both stages.4 The problem is complicated by the fact that the parotid region is one of the most common topographic areas with involvement of
head and neck pilomatricomas,1,5-7 which also increase the dilemma of clinicians and pathologists because pilomatricoma is seldom considered
as a differential diagnosis for a mass lesion involving this region. In fact, some reports on FNAC from such lesions had suggested parotid
neoplasm,5 or even metastatic malignant deposits.6 Because surgeons relying greatly on cytology in clinically suspected parotid tumors, such
approach have resulted in more aggressive surgical treatment.5,6,8 Figure 1The pre-operative image shows a diffuse swelling in the left pre-
auricular region producing an impression of a parotid mass. Note the “tent sign” (arrow). The skin appears taut and stretched. On careful
examination, a faint bluish tinge over the lesion could be seen Figure 2Histopathology shows two predominant cell population of
pilomatricoma – the basophilic basaloid cells with scanty cytoplasm, prominent nuclei and indistinct borders, and the eosinophilic
anucleated “ghost cells” with relatively distinct borders, and with a transitional zone in between. As the tumor ages, the basaloid cells
undergo apoptosis and become “ghost cells”. Hematoxylin-eosin x 400 The surgical dissection revealed adhesion with overlying skin and
superficial lobe of parotid suggesting pathologic tumor adhesion. A pilomatricoma should be surgically excised, but often at the cost of the
overlying skin in large tumors since it is a lesion of the dermis/subdermis. A fibrous layer separates the tumor from epidermis and makes
the skin taut, giving an impression of adhesion in pre-operative computed tomography scan8 and in the surgery. In our case, the tumor was
relatively large, and we dissected it from the skin without a surgical plane. Because of the likelihood for recurrence, we decided to keep
the patient under close follow-up. Ultrasonography can be a cost-effective modality to delineate tissue plane in lesions of the parotid
region especially in children. In addition, it also constitutes a non-invasive tool and does not require sedation. However, in our case it
did not show benefits. Thus, it is important to emphasize that head and neck surgeons and pediatricians should consider pilomatricoma when
diagnosing mass lesions involving the parotid region, especially because such lesions constitute the second most common cutaneous tumor in
childhood,9 and more than half of them involve the head and neck region.8 Proper clinical details with representative aspirate in air-dried
smears (ensuring maximum yield of “ghost cells”) would guide cytologists to establish the correct diagnosis. To consider the subtle clinical
signs and suggest a review of the smear or re-aspiration can avoid surgical “overtreatment” and unwanted morbidity. Paciente do sexo
feminino, 10 anos, apresentando edema de crescimento leve e indolor na região pré-auricular esquerda observado por 2 anos (Figura 1). A
lesão era bocelada, indolor, firme na palpação, apresentava margens pouco definidas e media aproximadamente 3,5cm x 3,0cm. Além disso, o
edema apresentava mobilidade restrita e parecia ter origem na parótida; a pele subjacente estava aparentemente esticada e fixa. A
ultrassonografia, porém, não pôde delinear a profundidade e nem confirmar o envolvimento na parótida, apesar de a citologia aspirativa por
agulha fina (CAAF) sugerir adenoma pleomórfico. Por essa razão, decidiu-se realizar parotidectomia superficial. A histopatologia, porém,
revelou que a lesão tratava-se de um pilomatricoma; um tumor incomum benigno da derme/subderme e ectoderme. O pilomatricoma é expressão
celular pluripotente no centro da matriz germinativa de folículos capilares com diferenciação das células corticais, sendo que a principal
relevância de sua presença clínica é seu potencial para interpretação inadequada – com frequência de diagnóstico retrospectivo – resultando
em intervenção agressiva desnecessária. Alguns estudos relataram diagnóstico pré-operatório em 1,1 a 29%.1,2Uma reanálise cuidadosa da
imagem pré-operatória revelou tonalidade azulada sútil não observada, presumidamente, pela característica escurecida da pele, e o
característico “sinal da tenda”3perceptível devido à superfície cutânea bocelada e esticada (Figura 1). A CAAF é necessária para avaliação,
porém frequentemente falha,4 em razão de amostragem inadequada e não representativa da lesão com conteúdo celular complexo. Em exemplo
típico, células basofílicas basaloides com citoplasma escasso e margens indistintas revestem células fantasmas/sombras anucleadas com
citoplasma rico em material eosinofílico (Figura 2), com áreas de queratinização, células gigantes e calcificação distrófica na matriz. Com
o envelhecimento do tumor, as “células fantasmas” centrais aumentam, às custas das células basófilas periféricas. Portanto, a CAAF pode ter
mais células basófilas em lesão em estágio recente enquanto os queratinócitos podem ser predominantes em estágios mais tardios, sendo
interpretada, erroneamente, como tumor maligno em ambos os estágios.4 O problema é complicado ainda mais em razão da parótida ser uma das
áreas topográficas mais comuns com envolvimento do pilomatricoma na região de cabeça e pescoço,1,5-7 que também aumenta o dilema dos
clínicos e patologistas já que o pilomatricoma é raramente considerado no diagnóstico diferencial para massa envolvendo essa região. Na
verdade, há relatos de que a CAAF dessas lesões sugeriu neoplasia da parótida,5 ou mesmo lesões malignas metastáticas.6 Em razão dos
cirurgiões se basearem amplamente na citologia em casos de suspeita clínica de tumores na parótida, tal abordagem tem resultado em
tratamentos cirúrgicos mais agressivos.5,6,8 Figura 1Imagem pré-operatória mostrando edema difuso na região pré-auricular esquerda
produzindo impressão de massa na parótida. Nota-se “sinal de tenda” (seta). A pele apresenta-se tensa e esticada. Em exame detalhado, pode-
se observar uma discreta tonalidade azulada sobre a lesão Figura 2Histopatologia mostrando as duas populações celulares predominantes do
pilomatricoma - células basofílicas basaloides com escassez de citoplasma, núcleos proeminentes e margens indistintas, e as “células
fantasmas” eosinofílicas e anucleadas, com margens relativamente distintas, com zona transicional no entremeio. Com o envelhecimento do
tumor, as células basaloides sofrem apoptose e transformam-se em “células fantasmas”. Hematoxilina-eosina x 400 A dissecção cirúrgica
revelou aderência com tecido subjacente e lobo superficial da parótida, sugerindo aderência tumoral. O pilomatricoma deve ser removido
cirurgicamente, porém, em geral, pode comprometer a pele subjacente em grandes tumores, já que se trata de lesão da derme/subderme. Um
camada fibrosa separa o tumor da epiderme, fazendo com que a pele fique tensa, dando a aparência de adesão na tomografia computadorizada8 no
pré-operatório e na cirurgia. Em nosso paciente, o tumor era relativamente grande, sendo dissecado sem delimitação de plano cirúrgico. Em
razão da possibilidade de recidiva, decidimos manter o paciente em seguimento. A ultrassonografia pode ser uma modalidade custo-efetiva para
delinear o plano do tecido em lesões na região da parótida, especialmente em crianças. Além disso, trata-se de ferramenta não invasiva e
dispensa o uso de sedativo. Todavia, em nosso caso, não apresentou benefícios. É importante enfatizar que cirurgiões de cabeça e pescoço e
pediatras devem considerar o pilomatricoma para diagnosticar lesões envolvendo a região parótida, especialmente por essas lesões serem o
segundo tumor cutâneo mais comum na infância,9além de mais da metade deles afetar a região da cabeça e pescoço.8 Detalhes clínicos adequados
com esfregaços citológicos representativos (assegurando o achado das “células fantasmas”) devem guiar os citologistas para estabelecer o
diagnóstico correto. Considerar os sinais clínicos e sugerir revisão dos esfregaços, ou refazer as aspirações da lesão, podem evitar
tratamento cirúrgico excessivo e reduzir possível morbidade.
