Supplemental Digital Content is available in the text In this study, we describe a patient in whom tigecycline-induced drug fever and
leukemoid reaction (LR) after 3 weeks of therapy for pneumonia. A 62-year-old man developed aspiration pneumonia on February 1, 2015. He had
received multiple antibiotics at another hospital, but did not respond well. Disease rapidly progressed, and he was referred to our
department on February 14. We adjusted the antibiotic therapy to tigecycline + vancomycin, and added voriconazole to empiric antifungal
therapy. Pneumonia largely improved, and we discontinued vancomycin and voriconazole on February 28. With tigecycline monotherapy, his
clinical status remained stable. On March 7, he developed high fever and LR (white blood cell count: 38.25 × 109/L). Erythrocyte
sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were elevated, and CD8+ T cells had been abnormally activated. After a careful physical
examination and laboratory investigation, we confirmed that primary infection did not progress and no other cause was evident. So we figured
fever and LR might be induced by tigecycline. After discontinuing tigecycline and adding low-dose steroid, fever and LR totally resolved in
3 days, which further confirmed our diagnosis. According to this case and literature review, drug-induced hypersensitivity should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of fever and LR when the therapeutic duration of tetracycline approximates 3 weeks. Monitoring
T-cell subsets may facilitate early diagnosis. When necessary, we should discontinue the suspected drug to confirm diagnosis. Tigecycline,
the first-in-class glycylcycline tetracycline antimicrobial agent, is the 9-t-butylglycylamido derivative of minocycline. With glycyl-amino
substitutions at position 9, tigecycline has more broad-spectrum, anti-infective activities (Figure S1, http://links.lww.com/MD/A492).
Clinically, adverse events of tetracycline antimicrobial agents commonly include gastrointestinal discomfort (nausea and vomiting), liver
dysfunction, impairment of renal function, and so on. Drug fever and leukemoid reaction (LR) are rarely caused by tetracycline antibiotics,
with only several cases reported to be associated with minocycline.1–4 Here, we describe a case in which fever and LR developed 3 weeks
after initiation of tigecycline therapy for pneumonia. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report of tigecycline-induced
drug fever and LR in the world. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Peking Union Medical College Hospital. Informed
consent has been obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. A 62-year-old man developed pneumonia after vomiting and
aspirating on February 1, 2015. Sputum culture was positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae (multidrug-resistant, sensitive to tetracycline).
Chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed effusions in bilateral lower lobes, with the right side more significant, and bilateral pleural
effusions (Figure S2A, http://links.lww.com/MD/A492). He had received piperacillin, tienam, teicoplanin, and sulperazone monotherapy or
combination at another hospital, but did not respond well. Disease rapidly progressed. He developed type I respiratory failure and underwent
tracheotomy on February 11, and was referred to our department 3 days later. Medical, family, and psychosocial history was not significant.
On physical examination, he was weak and unconscious, with hyperthermic (38.7°C), hypertension (149/75 mm Hg), and tachypnea (30 beats per
minute). Auscultation revealed that bilateral breath sounds were rough, and bilateral lower breath sounds were weak. We adjusted the
antibiotic therapy to 50 mg tigecycline + 1 g vancomycin q12 h. Meanwhile, we added voriconazole 0.2 g q12 h to empiric antifungal therapy.
He gradually came back to consciousness and his temperature normalized (37.3°C). Signs and symptoms of pneumonia largely improved. Repeat
chest CT scan showed bilateral pleural effusions were less than before, but the remaining was unchanged (Figure S2B,
http://links.lww.com/MD/A492). Vancomycin and voriconazole were discontinued on February 28. With tigecycline monotherapy, his clinical
status remained stable. On March 7, our patient developed scattered rash on both lower extremities, and his temperature reached 39.0°C on
the same night (Fig. 1). His general status was well, and signs and symptoms of pneumonia did not worsen. His white blood cell (WBC) count
was 38.25 x 109/L (from 13.34 × 109/L 1 d earlier), with 83.2% neutrophils, 0.2% eosinophils, and 9.8% lymphocytes (Fig. 1). Blood smear did
not identify naïve blood cells. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 58 mm/h and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 108 mg/L. Blood culture
and T-SPOT.TB were both negative. G-test was <100 pg/mL. T-cell subsets showed CD8+ T cells were abnormally activated (CD8-DR 73.8%,
CD8+CD38+ 94.0%). Repeat chest CT scan did not indicate any progression of the primary infection (Figure S2C, http://links.lww.com/MD/A492).
Since fever and LR cannot be explained by primary infection and no other cause was evident after a careful physical examination and
laboratory investigation, we figured fever and LR were induced by tigecycline, which was the only agent he was receiving at that time.
Highest daily temperature, white blood cell, total neutrophil, eosinophil, and lymphocyte counts during hospital stay. With tigecycline
monotherapy, the clinical status of our patient remained stable for 1 week. On March 7, his temperature reached 39.0°C and he developed
leukemoid reaction (LR) the next day. Since fever and LR cannot be explained by primary infection and no other cause was evident, drug
hypersensitivity was suspected. We discontinued tigecycline and added dexamethasone 2 mg QD for 3 days. After that, his temperature and WBC
count gradually normalized. QD = quaque die, WBC = white blood cell. After discontinuing tigecycline on March 9, rash recessed, WBC count
came down, and his temperature gradually came down in 48 hours, which is appropriate to the t1/2 of tigecycline (42.4 h); this helped to
demonstrate that fever and LR were induced by tigecycline. Dexamethasone (DEX) 2 mg quaque die (QD) was added on March 13 for 3 days, and
his temperature, WBC count, as well as inflammatory indexes, normalized a step further. High-resolution chest CT scan showed infiltrates of
the right lung and right pleural effusion largely improved; pleural effusion on the left side was almost absent (Figure S2D,
http://links.lww.com/MD/A492). He recovered and discharged on March 31. To this end, our patient fulfilled the criteria for drug fever and
LR, which were induced by tigecycline. The patient was reported asymptomatic in our 3-month follow-up by telephone. We report what we
believe to be the first case report of tigecycline-induced drug fever and LR in the world. By literature review, we found several previous
case reports of drug fever and LR induced by minocycline. It is reported that minocycline serves as a cytokine which induces neutrophil
movement from bone marrow into the circulation and results in LR.1,3–5 In minocycline-related case reports, systemic reactions can be
severe. Apart from high fever and LR, minocycline can also cause generalized eruption, exfoliative dermatitis, and severe hepatitis, which
can be even fatal without timely and proper intervention.5 Since tigecycline and minocycline are both tetracycline derivatives and are
similar in constructions (Figure S1, http://links.lww.com/MD/A492), it is reasonable to figure that they can induce similar
hypersensitivities. According to the characteristics of our patient and previous reported cases, when the therapeutic duration of
tetracycline approximates 3 weeks, drug-induced hypersensitivity should be considered in the differential diagnosis of fever and LR. Those
who are old in age and receive multiple drugs during the course of disease are at higher risk of developing hypersensitivity. Meanwhile,
T-cell activation is related to tetracycline-induced hypersensitivity. Therefore, monitoring T-cell subsets may help to recognize
hypersensitivity in early stage and facilitate the next diagnosis.4,6 When necessary, an attempt should be made to discontinue the suspected
drug to confirm the diagnosis. It is also an option to add short-term low-dose steroid to facilitate inflammation recession, especially when
the adverse event is severe and fatal. Contributors: Q-QS, LQ, G-RR, and X-JM looked after the patient, and R-XC and Z-JL collected the
data. All authors contributed to the report. Written consent to publication was obtained. Abbreviations: CRP = C-reactive protein, CT =
computed tomography, DEX = dexamethasone, ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate, LR = leukemoid reaction, WBC = white blood cell. Q-QS and LQ
contributed equally to this work. Grant support: The Clinical Research Special Fund of Wu Jieping Medical Foundation (NO. 320.6750.14339),
China. Declaration of interests: All authors state that there is no conflict of interest. Supplemental digital content is available for this
article. Direct URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal's
Website (www.md-journal.com).
