The imaging finding of omental cake has been demonstrated in other modalities, such as computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and
ultrasonography. However, to the best of our knowledge, the image presentation of omental cake on a routine kidney-ureter-bladder film has
not been reported before in the literature. We presented a unique case of a 61-year-old woman, with known advanced cecal colon mucinous
adenocarcinoma, presented to our institution with abdominal fullness, poor appetite, and decreased stool passage for 20 days. Physical
examination was unremarkable, except distended abdomen. Subsequent study revealed massive post-pigtail catheter drainage ascites with a
prominent soft-tissue mass-causing centralization and tethering of focally distended small bowel gas, suggestive of omental cake on plain
radiograph. The imaging finding in plain radiograph corresponds to the findings in other imaging modalities, including abdominal sonography
and computed tomography. The patient underwent subtotal colectomy and ileostomy during later courses of chemotherapy due to adhesion ileus
and possible intraabdominal abscess, and pathologic study confirmed the diagnosis of cecal mucinous adenocarcinoma and peritoneal
carcinomatosis. Although the image finding of omental cake on plain radiograph has never been described, this image finding is unique and
should be recognized, as it may suggest the presence of omental cake when first identified in the emergency department from patients with
abdominal distension and warrant further evaluation to evaluate the underlying cause. Omental cake, or diffuse peritoneal infiltration,
occurs most commonly secondary to intraperitoneal tumor spread; other causes include primary malignancy, inflammatory conditions, and other
less-common benign conditions.1,2 The imaging finding of omental cake has been well demonstrated in other modalities, such as computed
tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and ultrasonography. Walkey et al 3 reviewed the computed tomography findings of 60 patients and
reported the following common findings of peritoneal malignancy, including loculated or nonloculated ascites (most common), peritoneal
thickening and enhancement, and bowel involvement, including distortion with or without obstruction. However, to the best of our knowledge,
this report describes the first case of omental cake presenting on a routine kidney-ureter-bladder film, which is the most commonly used
imaging modality for the initial survey of a distended abdomen in emergency department. The institutional review board (Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital) approved this work and waived the need for inform consent. A 61-year-old woman with known advanced cecal colon mucinous
adenocarcinoma presented to the emergency department with abdominal fullness, poor appetite, and decreased stool passage for 20 days.
Tracing back to the history, she underwent chemotherapy due to peritoneal carcinomatosis detected on computed tomography. Physical
examination was unremarkable, except distended abdomen. A kidney-ureter-bladder radiograph taken during treatment follow-up revealed massive
post-pigtail catheter drainage ascites with a prominent soft-tissue mass-causing centralization and tethering of focally distended small
bowel gas (Fig. 1A). Abdominal computed tomography confirmed the corresponding finding of omental cake with a mass resulting in traction and
encasement of the adjacent bowel, accompanied by massive ascites and peritoneal enhancement (Fig. 1B), in which the centrally dilated bowel
is correlated both in kidney-ureter-bladder radiograph and computed tomography (comparing Fig. 1A and B). Transabdominal ultrasonography
revealed soft-tissue nodules and infiltration of bowel walls (Fig. 1C, D). The patient underwent subtotal colectomy and ileostomy during
later courses of chemotherapy due to adhesion ileus and possible intraabdominal abscess. Patient tolerated the surgery well with resolution
of intraabdominal abscess, improved appetite and constipation status. A pathologic study confirmed the diagnosis of cecal mucinous
adenocarcinoma and peritoneal carcinomatosis with metastatic mucinous adenocarcinoma (Fig. 1E and F). Multipanel imaging of omental cake in
plain radiograph, computed tomography, and abdominal ultrasonography with histopathology study: (A) A routine kidney-ureter-bladder film
revealed massive postpigtail catheter drainage ascites with a prominent soft-tissue mass-causing centralization and tethering of focally
distended small bowel gas (arrows). (B) Abdominal computed tomography confirmed the finding of omental cake with a mass resulting in
traction and encasement of the adjacent bowel, accompanied by enhancing peritoneum (arrows), and loculated ascites in the omentum. Note the
centrally dilated bowel gas in panel B, which correlated with the image finding of centrally dilated bowel in panel A. (C, D) Transabdominal
ultrasonography revealed soft-tissue nodules and infiltration of bowel walls. (E, F) Histopathology of cecal mucinous adenocarcinoma with
peritoneal carcinomatosis: (E) Hematoxylin and eosin staining (40×) showed neoplastic villoglandular structures in the resected cecal mass
(arrow), compatible with cecal adenocarcinoma. (F) Hematoxylin and eosin staining (40×) showed the omentum with visible omental fat (star)
and neoplastic villoglandular structures in the omentum (arrow) within the abundant mucin pool (arrowhead). These findings are compatible
with mucinous adenocarcinoma in the omentum. Peritoneal carcinomatosis is the dissemination and implantation of tumor cells throughout the
peritoneal cavity. Omental cake refers to soft tissue thickening of the omentum secondary to tumor seedings or omental fat infiltration.4 A
previous study reported the occurrence of peritoneal carcinomatosis in 50% of patients with colorectal cancer and the peritoneal cavity as
the only site of recurrence in up to 25% of patients.5 Metastatic colon cancer can present as mucinous implants,4 as reported in our case,
but such metastatic mucin-producing tumors may also originate from the ovary, uterus, gastrointestinal tract (appendix), and organs
(pancreas).3,5 The typical imaging presentation of omental cake has been described as a thickened omentum with diffuse tumor infiltration in
advanced peritoneal carcinomatosis.3 However, the differentiation of peritoneal carcinomatosis from adjacent soft tissue or bowel gas has
not been reported by kidney-ureter-bladder radiograph alone. Thus, its diagnosis depends heavily on the findings of other imaging
modalities, such as computed tomography, ultrasonography, and magnetic resonance imaging, but these modalities are either much more
expensive or more time consuming.5,6 Other indirect evidence of omental metastases has been reported, such as the presence of ascites or
extracellular mucin and mesenteric thickening.5 As described above, the findings of bowel tethering and distortion in the case described
here with kidney-ureter-bladder film were due to loculated ascites with tumor encasement and infiltration along the small bowel, which is
compatible with previously described computed tomography findings.3 Omental vascular pedicle sign has been proposed in patients with
metastatic or primary omental mass.7 Our presented case shows omental cake with a massive ascites mass resulting in traction and encasement
of the adjacent bowel, accompanied by peritoneal enhancement, although dilated omental vein was not observed. This could probably due to the
omental cake formation in our patient was due to diffuse omental caking from metastatic mucinous adenocarcinoma rather than the various
pathologies proposed by Karcaaltincaba et al. Our report presents the first known case of this imaging finding on a routine kidney-ureter-
bladder radiograph. It may suggest the presence of omental cake when identified and warrant further evaluation to evaluate the underlying
cause. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
