Bier spots are asymptomatic, small, irregular, hypopigmented macules characterized by a normal histological appearance, which are usually
found on the arms and legs of young adults. We describe the simultaneous presence of Bier spots in two siblings. This finding is unusual
since, to the best of our knowledge, concurrent familial cases have never been reported in the literature. Bier spots are small, irregular,
hypopigmented macules characterized by a normal histological appearance, which are usually found on the arms and legs of young adults.1,2
They are thought to be a benign, physiologic, vascular anomaly. Since the condition is asymptomatic and usually resolves spontaneously, no
specific treatment is required.2 We describe the first instance of simultaneous presence of BS in two siblings. A 35-year-old female and her
38-year-old sister presented to our department with asymptomatic, small, hypopigmented macules distributed symmetrically on the limbs
(Figure 1). In both patients, the spots were visible when extremities were placed in a dependent position and disappeared when limbs were
raised. Lesions started appearing in the older sister around the age of 25, while in the younger sister, they appeared when she was about
30. There were no mucosal or nail abnormalities and no associations with acrocyanosis or hyperhidrosis. The women had no history of vascular
disease or other relevant pathological conditions. No other family member had had similar lesions. Routine laboratory tests yielded normal
results. Tests for cryoglobulin, antiphospholipid antibody, antinuclear antibody, and proteins S and C were all negative. On the basis of
the characteristic clinical manifestations, Bier spots (BS) were diagnosed. The patients did not receive treatment. Hypopigmented macules on
the older sibling’s right arm and on her sister’s left arm. BS consists of asymptomatic, small, irregular, hypopigmented macules
characterized by a normal histological appearance, which are usually found in individuals aged 20-40 and more frequently in women than
men.1,2 The skin surrounding the lesions may be normal or mildly erythrocyanotic. BS are typically distributed symmetrically on the limbs
and tend to appear with venous congestion when patients stand, while they usually disappear if venous flow is enhanced by the elevation of
affected extremities. Cases with trunk involvement and generalized lesions have also been described.1 Furthermore, BS have rarely been
reported in association with conditions such as scleroderma renal crisis, pregnancy, cryoglobulinaemia, coarctation of the aorta, hypoplasia
of the aorta, palmar hyperhidrosis, tachycardia, varicosity, lichen planus, alopecia areata and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.3 BS are thought to
be an exaggerated but physiological, vasoconstrictive response induced by venous stasis-associated hypoxia or, conversely, by a failure of
the venoarteriolar reflex in dermal ascending arterioles in response to venous filling. Other possible pathogenetic mechanisms involved in
the development of the lesions include rheological abnormalities such as hyperviscosity induced by cryoglobulinaemia.4 The main differential
diagnoses for BS include disorders either with white macules caused by hypopigmentation (pityriasis versicolor, vitiligo, achromic nevus,
postinflammatory hypopigmentation, etc), or those caused by vascular abnormalities (nevus anemicus).1 Since the condition usually resolves
spontaneously, no specific treatment is required.2 In our report we observed the simultaneous presence of BS in two siblings, which is
unusual since, to the best of our knowledge, concurrent familial cases have never been reported in the literature. Although we cannot
exclude the possibility that familial occurrence of BS may be casual, we speculate that such an event suggests genetic characteristics may
be a factor in the development of the condition, for example a predisposition to an aberrant vasomotor response of the small cutaneous
vessels or rheological abnormalities. Importantly, some authors have hypothesized that certain alleles in an autosomal gene locus predispose
to skin vasodilatation or vasoconstriction, holding that one of the alleles in particular is responsible for increased vasodilation, and
that its homogenous allele accounts for increased vasoconstriction. According to the hypothesis, the functional balance between the two
alleles results in a normal vascular tonus; however, some genetic aberrations could lead to an imbalance towards an increased skin
vasoconstriction, thus favoring the onset of BS.5 In conclusion, this is the first ever report on BS in two siblings; the rarity of familial
cases, as well as sporadic forms, is likely due to the fact that the condition is asymptomatic and often goes unnoticed.1 We hope that this
report will stimulate further reports and studies, in order to confirm or not the possible role of a genetic component in the genesis of BS.
Conflict of Interest: None. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Stinco G, Errichetti E, Patrone P. Hypopigmented macules of
the limbs in two sisters: a report of familial Bier spots. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(5):738-9. Work performed at the Institute of
Dermatology, "Santa Maria della Misericordia" University Hospital, Udine, Italy.
