Mycobacterium abscessus is a rapidly growing mycobacterium that has been affecting people undergoing invasive procedures, such as
videosurgery and mesotherapy. This bacterium has global distribution, being found in numerous niches. The frequency of published reports of
infection by rapidly growing mycobacteria associated with tattooing procedures has increased in recent years. However, in Brazil there were
no case reports of M. abscessus after tattooing in the literature until now. In this paper, we describe the case of a patient with a nine-
month history of lesion on a tattoo site. The diagnosis of infection with Mycobacterium abscessus was established by correlation between
dermatological and histopathological aspects, culture and molecular biology techniques. The patient had significant improvement of symptoms
with the use of clarithromycin monotherapy. Mycobacterium abscessus is a rapidly-growing mycobacterium with global distribution, being found
in numerous niches, including soil, water, dust and family and hospital settings.1 This mycobacterium was first described in 1953 by Moore
and Frerichs. However, it was only in 1992, after its separation from the Mycobacterium chelonae group, that M. abscessus acquired the
recognition that it is an important human pathogen responsible for a wide spectrum of soft tissue infections (after trauma or surgery),
pulmonary infections and disseminated disease in immunocompromised patients.2,3 The incidence of infections by rapidly growing mycobacteria
has increased in recent decades. This is partly attributed to the increased frequency of surgical procedures, immunosuppression in patients
and the more efficient identification of the pathogen.4 In the literature, there are reports of infections by M. abscessus after
mesotherapy, acupuncture, insulin injections in diabetic patients and other surgical procedures.1,5 We report an unusual case of primary
skin inoculation by M. abscessus after tattooing. A 42-year-old female patient, nurse, who lived in Manaus, Amazonas, had with a nine-month
history of lesion on a tattoo site (lower third of the left leg), associated with mild itching and decreased tactile sensitivity. The
tattooing had been done approximately two years earlier. Clinical examination evidenced a papule-nodular, floating injury, with an
erythematous surface, little infiltrative capacity and imprecise limits on the tattoo site (Figure 1). There was no nerve enlargement and
sensitivity tests performed on the injury site were unchanged. The patient denied comorbidities and had no systemic symptoms. She had
already made use of topical treatments, but with no clinical improvement. Erythematous plaque little infiltrative capacity on the tattoo
site Histopathology showed a granulomatous inflammatory infiltrate composed of lymphocytes, histiocytes, epithelioid cells and giant
Langerhans-type cells throughout the dermis and hypodermis (Figure 2). Special staining for AFB (acid fast bacilli alcohol) did not reveal
bacilli. Inflammatory granulomatous process with presence of epithelioid cells and giant cells A smear of the lesion was negative, but a
culture in Loewenstein-Jensen medium showed isolation of fast-growing mycobacterium. M. abscessus was identified by PCR using hsp65
sequence. The patient was treated with clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily. After five months of follow up, the patient showed clinical
improvement, with reduction of the erythema and mild local atrophy. Tattoos have become one of the most important aesthetic manifestations
of our time. Complications occur in about 2% of cases and include infections (such as the report of the appearance of molluscum contagiosum
on a tattoo seven months after the tattoo procedure), neoplasms and inflammatory dermatoses.6,7 The frequency of published reports of
infection by rapidly growing mycobacteria associated with tattooing procedures has increased in recent years.3 This may be due to a more
efficient identification of cases or may indicate an emerging problem caused by unsafe tattooing practices or by the increased popularity of
tattoos.3 A search of the databases PubMed / Medline and Virtual Health Library (VHL) revealed that, in Brazil, there were no case reports
of infection with M. abscessus after tattooing in the literature up to now. There are reports of outbreaks involving contaminated devices
such as needles and scalpels, after mesotherapy, multiple acupuncture treatments, and insulin injections in diabetic patients.1,6 There are
only eight confirmed cases caused by M. abscessus after tattooing. The first case was reported in France in August 2010. A 51-year-old
patient developed papular-pustules on a tattoo site 10 days after the tattoo procedure.2 In November of that year in Australia, M. abscessus
was identified in papules on a tattoo site of a 25-year-old man 7-10 days after the procedure.8 In August 2012, the CDC (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention), in the United States, confirmed 3 cases of M. abscessus infection and in August 2013, in England, M. abscessus was
identified in 3 of five cases caused by the rapidly growing mycobacteria.6 The probable responsible for the infections with fast-growing
mycobacteria after tattooing could be contamination of ink or use of non-sterilized water for the dilution of ink or for washing
equipments.3 The time elapsing between the tattooing and the appearance of skin manifestations varied between seven days and three months in
the case reports. Patients also had variable clinical presentation, such as erythematous papules or pustules, nodules, ulcerated nodules,
plaques lichenoid aspect.2 Symptoms include pain and itching.6 In the case presented here, a long time elapsed between the tattoo procedure
and the onset of clinical manifestations, but this has also occurred in other reports of infections with M. abscessus.9 The link between the
procedure and the injury was established by clinical history and by correlation between the clinical lesion, histopathological findings and
the identification of M. abscessus, which was performed accurately, making any contaminant hypothesis untenable. There is still no
established treatment for skin infection with M. abscessus. Multiple treatment modalities are recommended, such as surgery, abscess
drainage, removal of necrotic tissue and a long course of antibiotics. M. abscessus is generally susceptible to clarithromycin, amikacin,
linezolid, tigecycline and haS variable susceptibility to cefoxitin and imipenem.5 In the 1990s, clarithromycin became the drug of choice
for M. abscessus infections and it is indicated as monotherapy only in immunocompetent patients with localized lesion. Combination therapy
(including parenteral drugs) is used in cases of disseminated infection, pulmonary infection or extensive skin disease.1,4 Recommendations
regarding the duration of therapy are unclear, but, in some cases, treatment may be extended for more than six months. For localized
disease, the recommendation is 4-6 months.1,6 The Brazilian National Health Surveillance Agency (ANVISA) has established technical standards
for tattoo studios, including guidance on the appropriate physical structure, materials, devices and performance of procedures. However,
there are no recommendations on the use of sterile water for washing the materials used or diluting the ink, as proposed by the CDC.10 To
our knowledge, this is the first case report of isolation of M. abscessus from an injury on a tattoo site in Brazil. We emphasize the need
to consider the possibility of clinical suspicion of infection with mycobacteria after tattooing and the need for public health measures to
make this procedure safer. Conflict of Interest: None. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Sousa PP, Cruz RCS, Schettini APM,
Westphal DC. Mycobacterium abscessus skin infection after tattooing - case report. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(5):741-3. Study conducted at
the "Alfredo da Matta" Dermatology and Venereology Foundation(FUAM) â€“ Manaus (AM), Brazil.
