Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) predominantly occurs in severely neutropenic immunocompromised subjects. The occurrence of acute IPA
after brief but massive exposure to Aspergillus conidia in previously healthy subjects has been documented, although only six such cases
have been reported. The diagnosis was delayed in all six of the affected patients, five of whom died. We report the case of a 50-year-old
HIV-negative male, a water pipeline maintenance worker, who presented with acute-onset dyspnea and fever one day after working for 2 h in a
deep pit containing polluted, muddy water. Over a one-month period, his general condition deteriorated markedly, despite antibiotic therapy.
Imaging showed bilateral diffuse nodules with cavitation, some of which were surrounded by ground-glass opacity suggestive of a halo sign (a
hallmark of IPA). Cultures (of sputum/bronchial aspirate samples) and serology were positive for Aspergillus fumigatus. After being started
on itraconazole, the patient improved. We conclude that massive exposure to Aspergillus conidia can lead to acute IPA in immunocompetent
subjects. Fungi of the genus Aspergillus can cause a wide variety of respiratory disorders, depending on the immune status of the patient.
Such disorders can range from simple allergic reactions and saprophytic colonization to invasive destruction of lung tissue with systemic
dissemination, designated invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA), which can be fatal. Typically, IPA occurs in immunocompromised patients,
with or without neutropenia. It is now also being seen in critically ill patients, without apparent immunosuppression, in intensive care
units. Other predisposing risk factors include chemotherapy (in patients with acute hematological malignancy), alcoholism, diabetes
mellitus, immunosuppression therapy (in recipients of organ transplants), and high doses of systemic corticosteroids.( 1 , 2 ) There have
been few reports of acute IPA caused by brief but massive exposure to Aspergillus sp. A search of the literature revealed four reports of
six cases occurring in immunocompetent subjects.( 3 - 6 ) There have also been a few reports of acute IPA in immunocompetent subjects after
near-drowning in contaminated water.( 7 ) The rarity of such scenarios prompted us to report the case of a previously healthy 50-year-old
male who developed acute IPA after working for 2 h in a pit containing polluted muddy water. A 50-year-old, HIV-negative male former smoker
who was a water pipeline maintenance worker with the water supply organization of the state of Delhi, India, was referred to our institute
for evaluation of dyspnea and fever that had developed acutely and had peaked over a period of three days. He presented to us one month
later, and his clinical course was characterized by progressive exertional dyspnea, together with cough and scant mucoid sputum, accompanied
by low grade, intermittent fever with chills and rigors. There was no wheezing, chest pain, palpitations, or hemoptysis. When questioned,
the patient reported having been exposed to polluted muddy water for 2 h while working in a deep pit, to repair a water pipeline, one day
prior to the onset of the symptoms. However, the patient emphatically denied having aspirated any of the water. The patient was completely
healthy prior to this event and had no history of using corticosteroids or any other medication. He had a 10 pack-year smoking history:
before quitting smoking 10 years prior, he had smoked 10 cigarettes per day for 20 years. The type of cigarette he smoked is known as a bidi
(or beedi), which is manufactured in India and consists of finely ground, sun-dried tobacco rolled in a brown leaf of one of two broadleaf
plants native to India-Diospyros melanoxylon or Diospyros ebenum.( 8 ) Physical examination revealed that the patient was a middle-aged man
in respiratory distress. There was no pallor, digital clubbing, or cyanosis. He was tachypneic, with a respiratory rate of 25 breaths/min,
and febrile. Diaphragmatic excursion, though rapid, was comparable on both sides. Breath sounds of equal intensity were audible bilaterally,
together with coarse bibasilar crackles. While breathing room air, the patient had an SpO2 of 90%, with a pH of 7.37, PaCO2 of 41.2 mmHg,
and a PaO2 of 46 mmHg. The total leukocyte count was 28.6 × 103 cells/µL, neutrophils accounting for 86%. The results of an
electrocardiogram, urinalysis, and blood glucose testing, as well as of tests of renal and hepatic function, were all within normal limits.
A chest X-ray obtained after the onset of symptoms showed bilateral multifocal consolidations with cavitation in some of the lesions (Figure
1A). A contrast-enhanced HRCT scan of the chest obtained one week after the onset of symptoms revealed multiple areas of consolidation as
well as nodular lesions of varying sizes with ill-defined margins. Some of those lesions showed cavitation, whereas others were surrounded
by ground-glass opacity, suggestive of a halo sign (Figure 1B). An abdominal ultrasound revealed hepatomegaly with grade II fatty
infiltration. Sputum smear microscopy and cultures revealed no growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis or other aerobic organisms. However,
sputum cultures showed pure growth of Aspergillus fumigatus. Figure 1.A) Chest X-ray, obtained after the onset of symptoms, showing
bilateral multifocal consolidations with cavitation in some of the lesions (arrows); B) HRCT scan of the chest, obtained one week after the
onset of symptoms, showed multiple areas of consolidation as well as nodular lesions of varying sizes, some showing cavitation and others
surrounded by ground-glass opacity consistent with a halo sign (arrow). Spirometry showed that the patient had an FVC of 3.01 L (82% of
predicted), an FEV1 of 1.88 L (62% of predicted), and an FEV1/FVC ratio of 0.62. These results are indicative of moderate obstructive lung
disease with no bronchodilator response. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy revealed hyperemic mucosa with whitish patches and foci of mucosal bleeding
in the right upper lobe. Cultures of post-bronchoscopy sputum and bronchial aspirate showed heavy growth of A. fumigatus. On skin prick
testing, the patient also showed immediate reactivity to A. fumigatus and A. niger. Total serum IgE was 114 kilo units of allergen per liter
(kUA/L; reference: < 64 kUA/L), and a fluorescence enzyme immunoassay (ImmunoCAP 100E; Phadia, Uppsala, Sweden) identified specific IgE and
IgG antibodies against A. fumigatus. Multiple endobronchial and transbronchial biopsies from both lungs demonstrated chronic nonspecific
inflammation. The bronchial aspirate did not yield M. tuberculosis or any other aerobic organism. The patient was diagnosed with acute IPA.
The diagnosis was substantiated by the heavy growth of A. fumigatus seen in the post-bronchoscopy sputum cultures, as well as in those of
the bronchial aspirate. The patient was started on itraconazole (200 mg twice daily for two months), together with treatment for obstructive
lung disease in the form of an inhaled long-acting β2 agonist and an inhaled muscarinic antagonist. The patient showed remarkable clinical
improvement, and chest imaging showed marked resolution of the lesions, with residual fibrosis (Figures 2A and 2B). At this writing, the
patient is on regular therapy for obstructive lung disease, the severity of which has been reduced considerably, and is largely
asymptomatic. Figure 2.Chest X-ray (A) and HRCT scan of the chest (B), both obtained after two months of treatment, showing marked
resolution of the lesions, with residual fibrosis. Seen predominantly in immunocompromised subjects, IPA is a life-threatening form of
pneumonia caused by Aspergillus spp., most commonly A. fumigatus. It is increasingly being seen in critically ill patients admitted to
intensive care units and in recipients of organ transplants.( 1 , 2 ) The occurrence of acute IPA in a previously healthy subject is rather
uncommon, and IPA due to massive but brief environmental exposure to Aspergillus sp. is quite rare; in the literature, we identified four
reports describing a collective total of six cases.( 3 - 6 ) The clinical descriptions of those six patients and of our patient are
summarized in Table 1.( 3 - 6 ) All six patients had a history of exposure to damp material likely to harbor Aspergillus sp., potentially
resulting in massive inhalation of conidia. There was a considerable diagnostic delay in all six cases. Of the six patients, five died,( 3 -
6 ) and the diagnosis was established only at autopsy in four.( 3 , 5 , 6 ) Cultures of sputum or bronchial aspirate were positive for A.
fumigatus in three of the six patients. ( 4 - 6 ) In our patient, A. fumigatus was also cultured from sputum collected at admission. Chest
X-rays showed patchy/homogeneous infiltrate in five patients,( 3 - 6 ) with right upper lobe cavitation in one. ( 6 ) Our patient also
showed bilateral diffuse cavitary nodules with ill-defined margins. An HRCT scan of the chest revealed bilateral interstitial infiltrates in
only one of the six patients,( 6 ) none of the other five patients having undergone HRCT. In our patient, HRCT demonstrated multiple nodules
of varying sizes with ill-defined margins, some of which showed cavitation, whereas others were surrounded by ground-glass opacity
suggestive of a halo sign, which is a hallmark of IPA and therefore facilitated the diagnosis. Four of the six patients underwent biopsy( 3
, 4 , 6 ): needle biopsy in one; open lung biopsy in one; and bronchial biopsy in two. Aspergillus hyphae were identified in only two of the
six patients( 4 , 6 ): from an open lung biopsy sample in one and from a bronchial biopsy sample in the other. Table 1.Clinical descriptions
of cases of acute invasive pulmonary aspergillosis, after massive exposure to Aspergillus conidia, in immunocompetent individuals. Reference
Case History of acute exposure Smoking status Other comorbidities Respiratory symptoms Imaging Cultures Diagnostic confirmation Serological
markers Treatment Outcome Strelling et al.,(3) conducted in the UK in 19661Sisters who played long hours in a barn during the months
preceding the disease, thus being exposed to natural and artificial manure; linseed oil; cattle cake; and grain.Not statedNoneDyspnea,
fever, and coughChest X-ray showed bilateral patchy infiltrates, more in the middle lobesSputum, negative for fungusLung needle biopsy, no
organism identifiedNot statedNot statedDeath (in both cases); positive staining for fungus was observed at autopsy2Dyspnea and feverChest
X-ray showed bilateral homogeneous infiltratesNot statedMeeker et al.,( 4 ) conducted in the USA in 19913Exposure to old damp hay two weeks
prior to presentationNot statedNoneLow-grade fever, chills, and dry coughChest X-ray showed diffuse nodular and interstitial
infiltratesSputum and BAL, negative for fungus; lung tissue, positive for Aspergillus fumigatus Open lung biopsy, hyphae of Aspergillus
sp.Total IgE, 6,630 kUA/L (reference: < 260 kUA/L); immunodiffusion, positive for Aspergillus antibodiesAmphotericin BDeath; no autopsy
performedBatard E et al.,(5) conducted in France in 20034Exposed to vegetal dust one day prior to presentationCurrent (10 cigarette-a-day)
smoker Fever, headache, myalgia, and dry coughChest X-ray showed bilateral interstitial miliary infiltratesBronchial aspirate, positive for
A. fumigatus Not statedSerology, negative for Aspergillus Amphotericin BDeath; postmortem lung biopsy culture positive for A. fumigatus
Arendrup et al.,( 6 ) conducted in Denmark in 20065Both exposed to bark chippings on the day symptoms startedNot statedHeart diseaseFever
and dry coughChest X-ray and HRCT scan showed bilateral interstitial infiltratesBAL, positive for A. fumigatus Bronchial biopsy,
hyphaePositive Aspergillus antibody titerAmphotericin BDeath; postmortem histopathology suggestive of Aspergillus pneumonia6Current
(20-cigarette-a-day) smokerMild COPD and Barrett's esophagusDry cough, pleuritic chest pain, and sweatingChest X-ray showed cavitating
pneumonia in the right upper lobeBAL, negative for fungusBronchial biopsy, not suggestive of Aspergillus Positive Aspergillosis precipitin
testItraconazoleImprovementPresent study7Worked for 2 h in a deep pit containing polluted muddy water, 1 day prior to symptom onsetFormer
smoker who quit 10 years prior (smoking history, 10 pack-years)Undiagnosed moderate obstructive lung diseaseDyspnea, cough, and feverChest
X-ray showed bilateral diffuse patchy infiltrates with bilateral cavitation; chest HRCT showed multiple ill-defined nodular lesions
affecting both lungs, with cavitation, some surrounded by ground-glass opacity (halo sign)Sputum and bronchial aspirate, positive for A.
fumigatus Chronic nonspecific inflammationTotal IgE, 114 kUA/L (reference: < 64 kUA/L); skin prick test reactivity to A. fumigatus and A.
niger; positivity for specific IgE and IgG antibodies against A. fumigatus Itraconazole (200 mg twice a day for 2 months)Clinical and
radiological improvementkUA: kilo units of allergen. kUA: kilo units of allergen. Fungi are known to occur in polluted water. A study
conducted in Malaysia identified fungi in wastewater from a sewage treatment plant,( 9 ) Aspergillus spp. being the second most common
isolates. Another study, conducted in Denmark, highlighted the dangers of the inhalation of aerosols, including the conidia of Aspergillus
spp., by wastewater workers.( 10 ) Putrid sludge from wastewater provides warm, humid conditions, which are ideal for the growth of molds.(
10 ) Our patient was exposed to polluted muddy water for 2 h while working in a deep pit. Given that his symptoms commenced the very next
day, that water was most probably the source of his exposure to Aspergillus conidia. Near-drowning episodes, especially in polluted water,
can also result in acute IPA in immunocompetent individuals.( 7 ) Aspergillus spp. are often recovered from water bodies and are a potential
cause of invasive disease in near-drowning victims, because the lung tissue can be damaged due to immersion and the large inoculum of
Aspergillus that can be deposited therein under such circumstances.( 7 ) Our patient showed immediate skin reactivity to Aspergillus
antigens, as well as testing positive for specific IgE and IgG antibodies against A. fumigatus, which suggests prior sensitization. Because
his profession entailed working in such environments on a regular basis, it is likely that he had previously been exposed to Aspergillus
antigens. Serological investigation plays a supporting role in the diagnosis of IPA. Although the disease typically occurs in
immunocompromised subjects, IgG antibodies against Aspergillus antigens are detected in 29-100% of IPA patients, such sensitization being
proportionally highest in non-neutropenic patients. However, the fact that it takes a mean of 10.8 days for antibodies to appear during the
acute phase of the disease reduces their diagnostic utility.( 11 ) A halo sign is defined as a nodule or mass surrounded by ground-glass
opacity on HRCT and is the earliest manifestation of IPA. This sign is transient, mainly seen during the early stages, and tends to
disappear with time.( 12 ) It is thus imperative to obtain HRCT scans in the early stages of IPA, because this key radiological marker might
not be visible thereafter. In our patient, the halo sign raised the suspicion of IPA and enabled rapid introduction of an antifungal agent,
which likely helped our patient survive. Although most commonly seen in IPA, halo signs can also be seen in other fungal, viral, or
bacterial infections and even in some systemic or neoplastic diseases.( 12 ) Because IPA usually occurs in immunocompromised hosts, it
rarely comes to mind in the diagnosis of those who are immunocompetent. This frequently leads to considerable diagnostic delays and
consequently to poor outcomes. Our report highlights the importance of suspecting IPA in immunocompetent patients who, in comparable
scenarios, might have suffered brief but massive exposure to Aspergillus conidia, leading to acute IPA. Study carried out in the Department
of Respiratory Medicine, Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, University of Delhi, Delhi, India. Financial support: None. A aspergilose
pulmonar invasiva (API) ocorre predominantemente em indivíduos imunocomprometidos com neutropenia grave. A ocorrência de API aguda após
exposição breve, mas maciça, a conídios de Aspergillus sp. em indivíduos previamente saudáveis já foi documentada, embora apenas seis casos
tenham sido relatados. O diagnóstico foi tardio em todos os seis pacientes afetados, dos quais cinco foram a óbito. Relatamos o caso de um
homem de 50 anos de idade, HIV negativo, trabalhador de manutenção de tubulação de água, que apresentou dispneia e febre de início agudo um
dia após trabalhar 2 h em uma vala funda contendo água poluída e barrenta. Num período de um mês, seu estado geral se deteriorou
acentuadamente, apesar da antibioticoterapia. Exames de imagem mostraram nódulos bilaterais difusos com cavitação, alguns dos quais
circundados por opacidade em vidro fosco sugestiva de sinal do halo (uma característica da API). As culturas (de amostras de
escarro/aspirado brônquico) e a sorologia foram positivas para Aspergillus fumigatus. Após iniciado o tratamento com itraconazol, o paciente
melhorou. Concluímos que a exposição maciça a conídios de Aspergillus pode levar a API em indivíduos imunocompetentes. Os fungos do gênero
Aspergillus podem causar uma grande variedade de distúrbios respiratórios, dependendo do estado imunológico do paciente. Tais distúrbios
podem variar de simples reações alérgicas e colonização saprofítica até a destruição do tecido pulmonar com disseminação sistêmica,
designada aspergilose pulmonar invasiva (API), que pode ser fatal. A API tipicamente ocorre em pacientes imunocomprometidos, com ou sem
neutropenia. Atualmente, vem sendo observada também em pacientes críticos, sem imunossupressão aparente, em unidades de terapia intensiva.
Outros fatores de risco predisponentes incluem quimioterapia (em pacientes com malignidade hematológica aguda), alcoolismo, diabetes
mellitus, terapia de imunossupressão (em receptores de transplantes de órgãos) e altas doses de corticosteroides sistêmicos.( 1 , 2 ) Há
poucos relatos de API aguda causada por exposição breve, mas maciça, a Aspergillus sp. A busca na literatura revelou quatro relatos de seis
casos que ocorreram em indivíduos imunocompetentes.( 3 - 6 ) Também há alguns relatos de API aguda em indivíduos imunocompetentes após quase
afogamento em água contaminada.( 7 ) A raridade de tais cenários nos levou a relatar o caso de um homem previamente saudável de 50 anos de
idade que desenvolveu API após trabalhar 2 h em uma vala contendo água poluída barrenta. Homem de 50 anos de idade, HIV negativo, ex-
fumante, trabalhador de manutenção de tubulação de água junto ao órgão desabastecimento de água do estado de Delhi, Índia, foi encaminhado
ao nosso instituto para avaliação de dispneia e febre que haviam evoluído de forma aguda e atingiu um pico num período de três dias.
Apresentou-se novamente a nós após um mês, e sua evolução clínica se caracterizava por dispneia progressiva aos esforços, juntamente com
tosse e escarro escasso e mucoide, acompanhados de febre baixa intermitente com calafrios e rigores. Ausência de sibilância, dor torácica,
palpitações e hemoptise. Quando questionado, relatou ter sido exposto a água poluída barrenta por 2 h enquanto trabalhava em uma vala funda,
para consertar uma tubulação de água, um dia antes do início dos sintomas. Porém, negou enfaticamente ter aspirado qualquer quantidade da
mesma. O paciente era totalmente saudável antes desse evento e não tinha história de uso de corticosteroides ou qualquer outra medicação.
Apresentava carga tabágica de 10 anos-maço: antes de parar de fumar há 10 anos, havia fumado 10 cigarros por dia durante 20 anos. O tipo de
cigarro que ele fumou é conhecido como bidi (ou beedi), que é fabricado na Índia e consiste em tabaco seco ao sol, moído muito fino,
enrolado em uma folha marrom de Diospyros melanoxylon ou Diospyros ebenum - duas plantas de folha larga nativas da Índia.( 8 ) Ao exame
físico, o paciente de meia idade apresentava dificuldade respiratória. Ausência de palidez, hipocratismo digital e cianose. Apresentava
taquipneia, com frequência respiratória de 25 ciclos/min, e febre. A excursão diafragmática, embora rápida, era comparável em ambos os
lados. Sons respiratórios de mesma intensidade eram audíveis bilateralmente, juntamente com estertores grossos bibasais. Respirando ar
ambiente, o paciente apresentava SpO2 de 90%, com pH de 7,37, PaCO2 de 41,2 mmHg e PaO2 de 46 mmHg. A contagem total de leucócitos foi de
28,6 × 103 células/µl, sendo que os neutrófilos representaram 89%. Os resultados do eletrocardiograma, da análise da urina e do teste de
glicose no sangue, bem como dos testes de função renal e hepática, estavam todos dentro dos limites normais. A radiografia de tórax
realizada após o início dos sintomas mostrou consolidações multifocais bilaterais com cavitação em algumas das lesões (Figura 1A). A TCAR de
tórax com contraste realizada uma semana após o início dos sintomas revelou múltiplas áreas de consolidação bem como lesões nodulares de
tamanhos variados com limites mal definidos. Algumas dessas lesões apresentavam cavitação, enquanto outras eram circundadas por opacidade em
vidro fosco, sugestiva de sinal do halo (Figura 1B). A ultrassonografia abdominal revelou hepatomegalia com infiltração gordurosa grau 2. A
baciloscopia e as culturas de escarro revelaram ausência de crescimento de Mycobacterium tuberculosis e outros organismos aeróbicos. Porém,
as culturas de escarro apresentaram crescimento puro de Aspergillus fumigatus. Figura 1.A) Radiografia de tórax, realizada após o início dos
sintomas, mostrando consolidações multifocais bilaterais com cavitação em algumas das lesões (setas); B) TCAR de tórax, realizada uma semana
após o início dos sintomas, mostrando múltiplas áreas de consolidação bem como lesões nodulares de tamanhos variados, algumas apresentando
cavitação e outras circundadas por opacidade em vidro fosco compatível com sinal do halo (seta). A espirometria mostrou que o paciente
apresentava CVF de 3,01 l (82% do previsto), VEF1 de 1,88 l (62% do previsto) e relação VEF1/CVF de 0,62. Esses resultados são indicativos
de doença pulmonar obstrutiva moderada sem resposta ao broncodilatador. A fibrobroncoscopia revelou mucosa hiperêmica com manchas
esbranquiçadas e focos de sangramento de mucosa no lobo superior direito. As culturas de escarro pós-broncoscopia e de aspirado brônquico
apresentaram crescimento significativo de A. fumigatus. No teste cutâneo, o paciente também apresentou reatividade imediata a A. fumigatus e
A. niger. A IgE sérica total foi de 114 quilo unidades de alérgeno por litro (kUA/l; referência < 64 kUA/l), e o imunoensaio enzimático com
fluorescência (ImmunoCAP 100E; Phadia, Uppsala, Suécia) identificou anticorpos IgE e IgG específicos contra A. fumigatus. Múltiplas biópsias
endobrônquicas e transbrônquicas de ambos os pulmões demonstraram inflamação crônica inespecífica. O aspirado brônquico revelou-se negativo
para M. tuberculosis e qualquer outro organismo aeróbico. O paciente foi diagnosticado com API. O diagnóstico foi fundamentado pelo
crescimento significativo de A. fumigatus observado nas culturas de escarro após a broncoscopia, bem como nas de aspirado brônquico. O
paciente iniciou tratamento com itraconazol (200 mg duas vezes ao dia por dois meses), juntamente com tratamento para doença pulmonar
obstrutiva na forma de um β2-agonista inalatório de longa duração e um antagonista muscarínico inalatório. O paciente apresentou notável
melhora clínica, e os exames de imagem do tórax mostraram resolução importante das lesões, com fibrose residual (Figuras 2A e 2B). Encontra-
se atualmente em tratamento regular para doença pulmonar obstrutiva, cuja gravidade diminuiu consideravelmente, e amplamente assintomático.
Figura 2.Radiografia de tórax (A) e TCAR de tórax (B), ambas realizadas após dois meses de tratamento, mostrando resolução importante das
lesões, com fibrose residual. A API, observada predominantemente em indivíduos imunocomprometidos, é uma forma de pneumonia causada por
Aspergillus spp., mais comumente o A. fumigatus. Vem sendo observada cada vez mais em pacientes críticos internados em unidades de terapia
intensiva e em receptores de transplantes de órgãos.( 1 , 2 ) A ocorrência de API em um indivíduo previamente saudável é muito incomum, e a
API causada por exposição ambiental maciça, mas breve, ao Aspergillus sp. é bastante rara; na literatura, identificamos quatro relatos
descrevendo um total coletivo de seis casos. ( 3 - 6 ) As descrições clínicas desses seis pacientes e do nosso paciente encontram-se
resumidas na Tabela 1.( 3 - 6 ) Todos os seis pacientes apresentavam história de exposição a material úmido que provavelmente abrigava
Aspergillus sp., o que potencialmente resultou em inalação maciça de conídios. Houve um atraso considerável no diagnóstico em todos os seis
casos. Dos seis pacientes, cinco foram a óbito,( 3 - 6 ) e o diagnóstico foi estabelecido apenas na autópsia em quatro.( 3 , 5 , 6 ) As
culturas de escarro ou aspirado brônquico foram positivas para A. fumigatus em três dos seis pacientes.( 4 - 6 ) Em nosso paciente, o A.
fumigatus também foi cultivado no escarro coletado na admissão. As radiografias de tórax mostraram infiltrados irregulares/homogêneos em
cinco pacientes,( 3 - 6 ) com cavitação no lobo superior direito em um.( 6 ) Nosso paciente também apresentou nódulos cavitados difusos
bilaterais com limites mal definidos. A TCAR de tórax, realizada em apenas um dos seis pacientes,( 6 ) revelou infiltrados intersticiais
bilaterais. Em nosso paciente, a TCAR demonstrou múltiplos nódulos de tamanhos variados com limites mal definidos, alguns dos quais
apresentavam cavitação, enquanto outros eram circundados por opacidade em vidro fosco sugestiva de sinal do halo, que é uma característica
da API e, portanto, facilitou o diagnóstico. Quatro dos seis pacientes foram submetidos a biópsia( 3 , 4 , 6 ): biópsia com agulha em um;
biópsia pulmonar a céu aberto em um; e biópsia brônquica em dois. Hifas de Aspergillus foram identificadas em apenas dois dos seis
pacientes( 4 , 6 ): a partir de fragmento de biópsia pulmonar a céu aberto em um e a partir de fragmento de biópsia brônquica no outro.
Tabela 1.Descrições clínicas de casos de aspergilose pulmonar invasiva aguda, após exposição maciça a conídios de Aspergillus, em indivíduos
imunocompetentes. Referência Caso História de exposição aguda Status tabágico Outras comorbidades Sintomas respiratórios Exames de imagem
Culturas Confirmação diagnóstica Marcadores sorológicos Tratamento Desfecho Strelling et al.,(3) realizado no Reino Unido em 19661Irmãs que
brincaram muitas horas em um celeiro durante os meses que antecederam a doença, expondo-se assim a esterco natural e artificial; óleo de
linhaça; torta para gado; e grãos.Não referidoNenhumaDispneia, febre e tosseA radiografia de tórax mostrou infiltrados irregulares
bilaterais, mais nos lobos médios.Escarro, negativas para fungosBiópsia pulmonar com agulha, nenhum organismo foi identificadoNão
referidosNão referidoÓbito (em ambos os casos); coloração positiva para fungos foi observada na autópsia2Dispneia e febreA radiografia de
tórax mostrou infiltrados homogêneos bilaterais.Não referidaMeeker et al.,( 4 ) realizado nos EUA em 19913Exposição a feno velho e úmido
duas semanas antes da apresentaçãoNão referidoNenhumaFebre baixa, calafrios e tosse secaA radiografia de tórax mostrou infiltrados
intersticiais e nodulares difusos.Escarro e LBA, negativas para fungos; tecido pulmonar, positiva para Aspergillus fumigatus Biópsia
pulmonar a céu aberto, hifas de Aspergillus sp.IgE total, 6.630 kUA/l (referência < 260 kUA/l); imunodifusão, positiva para anticorpos
contra Aspergillus Anfotericina BÓbito; nenhuma autópsia foi realizadaBatard E et al.,(5) realizado na França em 20034Exposição a poeira
vegetal um dia antes da apresentaçãoFumante atual (de 10 cigarros por) Febre, cefaleia, mialgia e tosse secaA radiografia de tórax mostrou
infiltrados intersticiais miliares bilaterais.Aspirado brônquico, positiva para A. fumigatus Não referidaSorologia, negativa para
Aspergillus Anfotericina BÓbito; cultura de biópsia pulmonar post-mortem positiva para A. fumigatus Arendrup et al.,( 6 ) realizado na
Dinamarca em 20065Ambos expostos a lascas de casca de árvore no dia em que os sintomas começaramNão referidoDoença cardíacaFebre e tosse
seca A radiografia de tórax e a TCAR mostraram infiltrados intersticiais bilaterais.LBA, positiva para A. fumigatus Biópsia brônquica,
hifasTítulo positivo de anticorpos contra Aspergillus Anfotericina BÓbito; histopatologia post-mortem sugestiva de pneumonia por Aspergillus
6Fumante atual (de 20 cigarros por dia)DPOC leve e esôfago de BarrettTosse seca, dor torácica pleurítica e sudoreseA radiografia de tórax
mostrou pneumonia cavitária no lobo superior direito.LBA, negativa para fungosBiópsia brônquica, não sugestiva de Aspergillus Resultado
positivo no teste de precipitina para aspergiloseItraconazolMelhoraPresente estudo7Trabalhou 2 h em uma vala funda contendo água barrenta
poluída, 1 dia antes do início dos sintomasEx-fumante que parou de fumar há 10 anos (carga tabágica, 10 maços-ano)Doença pulmonar obstrutiva
moderada não diagnosticadaDispneia, tosse e febreA radiografia de tórax mostrou infiltrados irregulares difusos bilaterais com cavitação
bilateral; a TCAR de tórax mostrou múltiplas lesões nodulares mal definidas acometendo ambos os pulmões, com cavitação, algumas circundadas
por opacidade em vidro fosco (sinal do halo).Escarro e aspirado brônquico, positivas para A. fumigatus Inflamação crônica inespecíficaIgE
total, 114 kUA/l (referência < 64 kUA/l); reatividade no teste cutâneo para A. fumigatus e A. niger; positividade para anticorpos IgE e IgG
específicos contra A. fumigatus Itraconazol (200 mg duas vezes ao dia por 2 meses)Melhora clínica e radiológicakUA: quilo unidades de
alérgeno. kUA: quilo unidades de alérgeno. Sabe-se que fungos ocorrem em águas poluídas. Um estudo realizado na Malásia identificou fungos
em água residuária proveniente de uma estação de tratamento de esgoto,( 9 ) sendo que os isolados de Aspergillus spp. foram os segundos mais
comuns. Outro estudo, realizado na Dinamarca, destacou os perigos da inalação de aerossóis, inclusive os conídios de Aspergillus spp., por
trabalhadores que lidam com água residuária.( 10 ) O lodo pútrido de águas residuárias propicia condições aquecidas e úmidas, que são ideais
para o crescimento de mofos.( 10 ) Nosso paciente foi exposto a água barrenta poluída por 2 h enquanto trabalhava em uma vala funda. Uma vez
que os sintomas começaram já no dia seguinte, essa água foi muito provavelmente a fonte de sua exposição a conídios de Aspergillus.
Episódios de quase afogamento, especialmente em águas poluídas, podem também resultar em API aguda em indivíduos imunocompetentes.( 7 ) Os
Aspergillus spp. costumam ser recuperados em corpos d'água e são uma possível causa de doença invasiva em vítimas de quase afogamento, pois
o tecido pulmonar pode ser danificado devido à imersão e a um grande inoculo de Aspergillus que pode ser depositado no mesmo sob tais
circunstâncias.( 7 ) Nosso paciente apresentou reatividade cutânea imediata a antígenos de Aspergillus, e também testou positivo para
anticorpos IgE e IgG específicos contra A. fumigatus, o que sugere sensibilização prévia. Como sua profissão implicava trabalhar em tais
ambientes regularmente, é provável que ele tenha sido previamente exposto a antígenos de Aspergillus. A investigação sorológica desempenha
um papel coadjuvante no diagnóstico de API. Embora a doença tipicamente ocorra em indivíduos imunocomprometidos, anticorpos IgG contra
antígenos de Aspergillus são detectados em 29-100% dos pacientes com API, sendo tal sensibilização proporcionalmente maior em pacientes não
neutropênicos. Porém, o fato de os anticorpos levarem uma média de 10,8 dias para aparecer durante a fase aguda da doença reduz sua
utilidade diagnóstica.( 11 ) O sinal do halo é definido como um nódulo ou massa circundada por opacidade em vidro fosco na TCAR e é a
manifestação mais precoce da API. Esse sinal é transitório, observado principalmente durante os estágios iniciais, e tende a desaparecer com
o tempo. ( 12 ) É, portanto, imperativo realizar TCAR nos estágios iniciais da API, pois esse marcador radiológico fundamental pode não ser
visível posteriormente. Em nosso paciente, o sinal do halo levantou a suspeita de API e possibilitou a rápida introdução de um antifúngico,
o que provavelmente ajudou nosso paciente a sobreviver. Embora sejam mais comuns na API, os sinais do halo também podem ser observados em
outras infecções fúngicas, virais ou bacterianas e até mesmo em algumas doenças sistêmicas ou neoplásicas.( 12 ) Como a API geralmente
ocorre em hospedeiros imunocomprometidos, a mesma raramente é lembrada no diagnóstico daqueles que são imunocompetentes. Isso frequentemente
leva a atrasos consideráveis no diagnóstico e, consequentemente, a desfechos ruins. Nosso relato destaca a importância da suspeição de API
em pacientes imunocompetentes que, em cenários comparáveis, possam ter sofrido exposição breve, mas maciça, a conídios de Aspergillus,
levando a API aguda. Trabalho realizado no Department of Respiratory Medicine, Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, University of Delhi,
Delhi, India. Apoio financeiro: Nenhum.
