Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 66 Final Diagnosis: Calciphylaxis Symptoms: Gastrointesinal haemorrhage
Medication: None Clinical Procedure: Hemodialysis • blood transfusions Specialty: Gastroenterology and Hepatology Rare disease Calciphylaxis
is associated with a high mortality that approaches 80%. The diagnosis is usually made when obvious skin lesions (painful violaceous
mottling of the skin) are present. However, visceral involvement is rare. We present a case of calciphylaxis leading to lower
gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding and rectal ulceration of the GI mucosa. A 66-year-old woman with past medical history of diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, end-stage renal disease (ESRD), recently diagnosed ovarian cancer, and on hemodialysis (HD) presented with painful black
necrotic eschar on both legs. The radiograph of the legs demonstrated extensive calcification of the lower extremity arteries. The hospital
course was complicated with lower GI bleeding. A CT scan of the abdomen revealed severe circumferential calcification of the abdominal
aorta, celiac artery, and superior and inferior mesenteric arteries and their branches. Colonoscopy revealed severe rectal necrosis. She was
deemed to be a poor surgical candidate due to comorbidities and presence of extensive vascular calcifications. Recurrent episodes of profuse
GI bleeding were managed conservatively with blood transfusion as needed. Following her diagnosis of calciphylaxis, supplementation with
vitamin D and calcium containing phosphate binders was stopped. She was started on daily hemodialysis with low calcium dialysate bath as
well as intravenous sodium thiosulphate. The clinical condition of the patient deteriorated. The patient died secondary to multiorgan
failure. Calciphylaxis leading to intestinal ischemia/perforation should be considered in the differential diagnosis in ESRD on HD
presenting with abdominal pain or GI bleeding. Calciphylaxis was first described in 1961 in rat models by Selye . The first human example of
calciphylaxis was described in 1968 . It is characterized by calcification of the intima media of the small arteries and arterioles with
subsequent small vessel thrombosis, endovascular fibrosis, and downstream tissue ischemia . The most common presentation is the painful
violaceous mottling of the skin, resembling livedo reticularis . However, calciphylaxis rarely manifests with gastrointestinal complications
. We present a case of calciphylaxis leading to rare visceral complications: intestinal ischemia, lower gastrointestinal bleeding, and
ulceration of the gastro-intestinal mucosa. A 66-year-old woman with past medical history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, end-stage
renal disease on hemodialysis (via tunneled catheter), and recently diagnosed ovarian cancer presented to our hospital with complaints of
painful rash on bilateral lower extremities. Her respiratory, cardiovascular, abdominal, and neurological exam results were un-remarkable.
Skin examination demonstrated black necrotic eschar on bilateral lower extremities (Figure 1A, 1B). The radiograph of the legs demonstrated
extensive calcification of the lower-extremity arteries (Figure 1C, 1D). A skin biopsy was not performed because of the clinically evident
disease consistent with calciphylaxis. Our patient was particularly unusual because she had elevated parathyroid hormone (166 pg/ml), low
calcium (7.9 mg/dl), normal phosphorus (2.6 mg/dl), and low calcium and phosphorus product. The highest calcium level in our hospital while
the patient was on HD was 8.6 mg/dl (reference, 8.6–10.2 mg/dl) and the highest phosphate level was 5.2 mg/dl (reference, 2.3–4.7 mg/dl).
The level of 25-hydroxy vitamin D was 8.6 ng/ml. We hemodialyzed her 5–6 times a week for 4 hours per day. We were not able to give her
cinacalcet because she had low calcium and low phosphate due to poor oral intake. Supplementation with vitamin D and calcium containing
phosphate binders was stopped. The hospital course was complicated with an episode of lower gastrointestinal (GI) bleed leading to a drop in
hemoglobin to 6.3 g/dl. Following the lower GI bleed, she underwent a CT scan of the abdomen/pelvis, which demonstrated severe
circumferential calcification of the abdominal aorta and all its branches – celiac artery, superior and inferior mesenteric arteries and
their branches – and extensive pneumoperitoneum with no evidence of extravasation of the contrast (Figure 2A, 2B). She also underwent
colonoscopy, which revealed severe rectal ulceration extending up to the muscularis mucosa with rectal necrosis (Figure 3). The procedure
was terminated because of the risk of perforation. No histologic specimens could be obtained. We considered colonic resection for the rectal
ulceration; however, she was deemed to be a poor candidate for surgery due to comorbidities and presence of extensive vascular
calcifications, which would have resulted in poor wound healing. The patient continued to have recurrent episodes of GI bleeding. We
continued to manage her conservatively with repeated blood transfusions whenever the hemoglobin dropped below 7 g/dl. The patient was on
broad-spectrum antibiotics (levofloxacin, metronidazole, cefepime, piperacillin-tazobactam, and vancomycin) and antifungals (fluconazole and
later micafungin) due to the extensive skin lesions. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy was given. We attempted intravenous sodium thiosulfate along
with hemodialysis, as a management strategy for calciphylaxis. There have been recent case reports of intradermal sodium thiosulfate
injections that led to improvement of the skin lesions . We combined lidocaine with sodium thiosulphate and injected them intradermally
around the areas that were violaceous, after obtaining consent from the patient and the health care proxy. Although it improved the pain,
which could have been due to the lidocaine component of the injection, it led to worsening of the skin lesions, leading to abscess formation
at the site of the injection. Clinical condition of the patient deteriorated and the patient subsequently died secondary to multiorgan
failure, likely secondary to calciphylaxis and cardiopulmonary arrest. Calciphylaxis is a rare disease, also known as metastatic
calcification . Cutaneous purpura and necrosis are the cardinal features of calciphylaxis . Hence, dermatologists can play a key role in
making an early diagnosis. There has been a case report where a patient with calciphylaxis presented with herpes simplex viral lesions .
Thus, presence of concomitant conditions incidentally is unfortunate and can lead to missing the correct diagnosis of calciphylaxis . In
such cases, the actual diagnosis is often not made until skin biopsy is performed. Biopsy reveals extensive deposits of calcium within the
walls of blood vessels . Differential diagnosis includes other vasculitides, such as polyarteritis nodosa, Churg-Strauss syndrome, Henoch-
Schönlein purpura, Wegener’s granulomatosis, Takayasu arteritis, giant cell arteritis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, warfarin-
induced skin necrosis, anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome, panniculitides, deep fungal infections, necrotizing fasciitis, and cholesterol
embolization with superadded infection . The pathogenesis of calciphylaxis in unclear. However, the proposed mechanism is that the presence
of hyperparathyroidism, hyperphosphatemia, and high calcium-phosphate product in the uremic milieu down-regulates the inhibitors of vascular
calcification. The ensuing vascular calcification leads to vasoconstriction, which ultimately leads to decreased distal perfusion and
ischemic manifestations . Secondary hyperparathyroidism and disturbances in the metabolism of calcium and phosphate are thought to be the
risk factors for calciphylaxis; therefore, it is more prevalent in patients with chronic renal failure on hemodialysis . There is often
marked elevation in the serum calcium, phosphate, and intact parathormone levels; however, absence of these findings does not preclude the
diagnosis . Radiographically, “pipe stem” calcification of the arteries and arterioles can be seen, as was seen in our patient (Figure 1C,
1D). Initially, patients with end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis present with violaceous skin lesions, but further manifestations
depend upon the area of compromised blood supply. It ranges from central nervous system manifestations due to compromised blood supply to
the brain parenchyma, to involvement of the visceral organs, which is rare. There have been very few reported cases of patients with
gastrointestinal complications of calciphylaxis . Coates et al. described 16 patients with calciphylaxis; the cause of death in 2 of these
patients was gastrointestinal hemorrhage . Gastrointestinal manifestations can include mucosal edema, diffuse ulcer formation, and bowel
perforation arising from bowel infarction. Intestinal ischemia leading to gastrointestinal bleeding is a common presentation in these
patients. Rarely, there can be an elevation of the liver function tests from involvement of the portal vein and hepatic arteries, leading to
hepatic ischemia . Although the exact etiology of gastrointestinal bleeding in our patient could not be determined, the presence of
extensive vascular calcification, multiple stenotic areas in the artery and its tributaries, and other overt manifestations of calciphylaxis
led us to believe calciphylaxis was the cause of bleeding. We considered surgical resection of the ulcerated colon in our patient; however,
it was not pursued further. The chances of healing of the resected margins were remote because of widespread calciphylaxis. Nieves et al.
reported a case in which the colon was resected but the incisions did not heal and the patient eventually died of sepsis . Management of
gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with calciphylaxis can thus be done with the resection of the intestinal segment if the disease is not
widespread and the long-term prognosis is good. Proton pump inhibitors can be used to manage the stress ulceration. Ablative therapies can
be used if the area of bleeding is accessible and ablatable. Conservative management with blood transfusion as needed is usually pursued
after exhaustion of definitive measures to stop the cause of bleeding. Supportive treatment is the mainstay of management of systemic
calciphylaxis . Sodium thiosulphate has emerged as a novel treatment modality for the management of calciphylaxis. It binds to calcium and
forms calcium thiosulphate, which can later be dialyzed. Some studies have shown that it increases the calcium solubility and inhibits the
precipitation of calcium in tissues . Although intravenous sodium thiosulphate has been the preferred route of treatment, a literature
review revealed intralesional injections of sodium thiosulphate as an emerging new experimental treatment modality for cutaneous lesions .
Patients who received sodium thiosulphate has been reported to produce a good response within a few weeks , but it did not help in our case.
Pamidronate has also been used for managing calciphylaxis . Hyperbaric treatment has been tried in patients to assist with wound healing ,
and parathyroidectomy has also been attempted . Normalization of the abnormal calcium and phosphorus levels can also be helped by diet,
binding agents, and low-calcium bath dialysate . Calciphylaxis is associated with a very high mortality that approaches 80% . The diagnosis
is usually made when the obvious skin lesions are present. However, visceral involvement is rare. It should be considered in the
differential diagnosis in end-stage renal disease patients (on hemodialysis) presenting with abdominal pain or gastrointestinal bleeding.
(A, B) Black necrotic eschar on bilateral lower extremities. (C, D) Radiograph of legs showed extensive calcification of the lower extremity
arteries. (A, B) CT scan of the abdomen demonstrating severe circumferential calcification of the abdominal aorta, celiac artery, superior
and inferior mesenteric arteries and their branches (stars highlight areas of extensive calcification along the visceral organs, arrow heads
and arrows indicate extensive calcification of all the arteries within the abdomen). Colonoscopy demonstrating severe rectal ulceration
extending up to the muscularis mucosa with rectal necrosis.
