In most cases, bladder carcinoma is located superficially, and the therapeutic approach is usually transurethral resection followed by
intravesical therapy (chemotherapy or immunotherapy).( 1 , 2 ) Initially produced as a vaccine against tuberculosis, BCG-an attenuated
strain of Mycobacterium bovis-has been widely used in immunotherapy over the last decades.( 1 , 3 ) Although BCG, used as immunotherapy, has
not produced the best results in many cancers, it has been clinically successful in the intravesical treatment of superficial bladder
carcinomas.( 4 ) Immunotherapy with intravesical BCG eradicates the residual tumor, slows the progression of the disease, reduces the need
for cystectomy, and prolongs survival.( 4 ) Treatment with BCG is well tolerated by over 95% of patients. The most common side effects are
local (inflammation, fever, and pelvic adenopathy). However, although rare, systemic complications have been described.( 1 , 3 - 6 )
Systemic dissemination of the attenuated M. bovis bacillus is known as BCGitis. It is more common in individuals with underlying primary or
secondary immunodeficiency but can occur in immunocompetent patients.( 1 , 6 ) There have been only a few reports of cases of respiratory
BCGitis.( 1 , 2 , 6 ) Here, we report the case of a patient who was treated with local BCG immunotherapy for urothelial bladder carcinoma
and developed a severe M. bovis respiratory infection. In March of 2013, a 72-year-old male presented with hematuria. The patient also had
hypertension, dyslipidemia, cerebrovascular disease (previous stroke), chronic renal failure, and depression. He was being treated with
perindopril, indapamide, atorvastatin, acetylsalicylic acid, furosemide, and escitalopram. He had no known drug allergies. Ultrasound
revealed a 2.5-cm polyp in the bladder. The patient underwent transurethral resection of the bladder tumor. Histological examination
revealed urothelial cell carcinoma (grade 2), without vascular or muscle invasion. Chemotherapy and immunotherapy with intravesical
instillation of BCG were started and continued until December of 2013. In February of 2014, the patient presented to the emergency
department with a one-week history of dyspnea and productive cough (mucopurulent sputum). He reported no fever, chest pain, hemoptysis,
sweating, or other symptoms. On physical examination, he was afebrile, with an increased respiratory rate, hemodynamic stability, and an
SpO2 of 89% on room air. Auscultation revealed bilateral breath sounds, with crackles in both lung bases. There were no other significant
changes. Ancillary tests showed a C-reactive protein level of 10 mg/dL, without leukocytosis, together with normal liver and kidney
function, overlapping with previous studies of the patient. Blood gas analysis (at a FiO2 of 24%) showed a pH of 7.43, a PaO2 of 66 mmHg, a
PaCO2 of 45 mmHg, and an HCO3 of 29.9 mEq/L. In addition, a chest X-ray showed bilateral diffuse reticulonodular infiltrates. A CT scan of
the chest revealed randomly distributed micronodules in the lungs, together with enlargement of the hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes
(Figure 1). After having collected sputum for analysis, we started empirical antibiotic treatment with amoxicillin and clavulanic acid. Due
to respiratory failure and suspected miliary tuberculosis or diffuse pulmonary metastasis, the patient was admitted to the respiratory ward
of the hospital. Figure 1.Chest CT scan showing randomly distributed micronodules in the lungs, together with enlargement of the hilar and
mediastinal lymph nodes. During hospitalization, microbiological and mycobacteriological cultures of sputum samples were negative.
Bronchoscopy revealed bilateral mucopurulent secretions, edema, and diffuse mucosal congestion. Microbiological cultures of bronchial lavage
and BAL fluid (BALF) samples were negative. Although the BALF was negative for M. tuberculosis on smear microscopy, it tested positive for
M. tuberculosis complex DNA and for M. bovis in cultures. Cytology of the BALF was negative for malignant cells; the patient also tested
negative for the viral markers of infection with HIV, HCV, and HBV. Because of the positive result on the nucleic acid amplification test of
the BALF, we started tuberculosis treatment with isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. Despite improvements in his test results
and clinical resolution of the respiratory failure, the patient showed a slight increase in liver enzymes (to less than double the normal
values). He underwent upper abdominal ultrasound, which revealed hepatic steatosis with no other abnormalities. In view of the BALF culture
positivity for M. bovis (which is naturally pyrazinamide-resistant), we suspended the pyrazinamide, and the liver enzyme values normalized
thereafter. The patient was discharged and continued treatment on an outpatient basis. Future scheduled BCG instillations were suspended. In
the initial phase of treatment, the regimen was the isoniazid-rifampin-ethambutol combination, whereas the isoniazid-rifampin combination
was used in the maintenance phase. After a total of 6 months of treatment, the patient showed a good response. At this writing, the patient
remains under follow-up monitoring of his bladder, without signs of recurrence. The patient gave written informed consent for the reporting
of his case. Various recent studies have analyzed the outcomes of patients with bladder carcinoma who underwent therapeutic intravesical
instillation of BCG. The study conducted by Lamm et al. showed that disseminated BCGitis was extremely rare.( 2 ) Some studies have reported
that, among patients with bladder cancer, there is a relationship between the complications of BCG instillation and a prior diagnosis of
tuberculosis, such complications not occurring in patients without a history of tuberculosis and with no evidence of sequelae on chest
X-rays.( 1 ) In this report, we have presented the case of a male patient without a history of tuberculosis who developed a respiratory
infection soon after treatment with intravesical instillation of BCG. The initial diagnostic hypotheses included malignancy. However, after
careful investigation, the patient was diagnosed with BCGitis, with no remaining doubt that the lung disease was due to the spread of the
BCG used in the treatment of his bladder carcinoma. Despite the rarity of this complication, our case report underscores the need for
vigilance and awareness of the possibility of BCG dissemination, given the widespread use of BCG in patients with bladder carcinoma. Na
maioria dos casos, o carcinoma de bexiga situa-se superficialmente, e a abordagem terapêutica é geralmente a resseção transuretral seguida
de terapia intravesical (quimioterapia ou imunoterapia).( 1 , 2 ) Inicialmente produzido como uma vacina contra a tuberculose, o BCG - uma
cepa atenuada de Mycobacterium bovis - tem sido amplamente usado na imunoterapia nas últimas décadas.( 1 , 3 ) Embora o uso do BCG na
imunoterapia não tenha produzido os melhores resultados em muitos cânceres, tem-se obtido êxito clínico com o uso do BCG no tratamento
intravesical de carcinomas superficiais de bexiga.( 4 ) A imunoterapia com BCG intravesical erradica o tumor residual, retarda a progressão
da doença, reduz a necessidade de cistectomia e prolonga a sobrevida. ( 4 ) O tratamento com BCG é bem tolerado por mais de 95% dos
pacientes. Os efeitos colaterais mais comuns são locais (inflamação, febre e adenopatia pélvica). No entanto, há relatos de complicações
sistêmicas, embora sejam raras.( 1 , 3 - 6 ) A disseminação sistêmica do bacilo M. bovis atenuado é conhecida como BCGite. É mais comum em
indivíduos com imunodeficiência primária ou secundária subjacente, mas pode ocorrer em pacientes imunocompetentes.( 1 , 6 ) Há apenas alguns
relatos de casos de BCGite respiratória.( 1 , 2 , 6 ) Relatamos aqui o caso de um paciente que recebeu imunoterapia local com BCG para o
tratamento de carcinoma urotelial de bexiga e apresentou grave infecção respiratória por M. bovis. Em março de 2013, um homem de 72 anos
apresentou hematúria. O paciente apresentava também hipertensão, dislipidemia, doença cerebrovascular (acidente vascular cerebral anterior),
insuficiência renal crônica e depressão. Estava sendo tratado com perindopril, indapamida, atorvastatina, ácido acetilsalicílico, furosemida
e escitalopram. Não tinha alergias medicamentosas conhecidas. A ultrassonografia revelou um pólipo de 2,5 cm na bexiga. O paciente foi
submetido a resseção transuretral do tumor da bexiga. O exame histológico revelou carcinoma de células uroteliais (grau 2), sem invasão
vascular ou muscular. O paciente passou a receber quimioterapia e imunoterapia com instilação intravesical de BCG, que prosseguiram até
dezembro de 2013. Em fevereiro de 2014, o paciente foi ao pronto-socorro; apresentava dispneia e tosse produtiva (escarro mucopurulento)
havia uma semana. O paciente não referiu febre, dor torácica, hemoptise, sudorese ou outros sintomas. O exame físico revelou que o paciente
estava afebril, com frequência respiratória aumentada, estabilidade hemodinâmica e SpO2 de 89% em ar ambiente. A auscultação revelou
murmúrio vesicular bilateral, com estertores crepitantes em ambas as bases pulmonares. Não havia nenhuma outra alteração significativa. Os
resultados de testes complementares revelaram um nível de proteína C reativa de 10 mg/dl, sem leucocitose, com função hepática e renal
normal, sobrepondo-se a estudos anteriores do paciente. A gasometria (com FiO2 de 24%) revelou pH de 7,43, PaO2 de 66 mmHg, PaCO2 de 45 mmHg
e HCO3 de 29,9 mEq/l. A radiografia de tórax revelou infiltrado reticulonodular difuso bilateral. A TC de tórax revelou micronódulos
distribuídos aleatoriamente nos pulmões, além de linfonodomegalia hilar e mediastinal (Figura 1). Após a coleta de escarro para análise, o
paciente passou a receber antibioticoterapia empírica (amoxicilina e ácido clavulânico). Em virtude de insuficiência respiratória e suspeita
de tuberculose miliar ou metástase pulmonar difusa, o paciente foi internado na enfermaria de pneumologia do hospital. Figura 1.TC de tórax
mostrando micronódulos distribuídos aleatoriamente nos pulmões, além de linfonodomegalia hilar e mediastinal. Durante a internação, os
resultados das culturas microbiológicas e micobacteriológicas de amostras de escarro foram negativos. A broncoscopia revelou secreções
mucopurulentas bilaterais, edema e congestão difusa da mucosa. Os resultados das culturas microbiológicas de amostras de lavado brônquico e
lavado broncoalveolar foram negativos. A baciloscopia do lavado broncoalveolar foi negativa para M. tuberculosis, mas o teste de DNA do
complexo M. tuberculosis e a cultura para M. bovis foram positivos. A citologia do lavado broncoalveolar foi negativa para células malignas.
Além disso, os testes dos marcadores virais de infecção por HIV, HCV e HBV foram negativos. Como o resultado do teste de amplificação dos
ácidos nucleicos do lavado broncoalveolar foi positivo, o paciente passou a receber tratamento para tuberculose com isoniazida, rifampicina,
pirazinamida e etambutol. Apesar da melhora nos resultados dos testes e da resolução clínica da insuficiência respiratória, o paciente
apresentou um ligeiro aumento das enzimas hepáticas (para menos que o dobro dos valores normais). O paciente foi submetido a
ultrassonografia abdominal superior, que revelou esteatose hepática sem outras anormalidades. Como a cultura do lavado broncoalveolar fora
positiva para M. bovis (que é naturalmente resistente à pirazinamida), a pirazinamida foi suspensa, e os valores das enzimas hepáticas então
voltaram ao normal. O paciente recebeu alta hospitalar e passou a ser tratado em regime ambulatorial. As instilações de BCG que já haviam
sido programadas foram suspensas. Na fase inicial do tratamento, foi usada a associação medicamentosa de isoniazida, rifampicina e
etambutol, ao passo que na fase de manutenção foi usada a associação de isoniazida e rifampicina. Após um total de 6 meses de tratamento, o
paciente apresentou boa resposta. No momento, o paciente está recebendo acompanhamento para a avaliação de sua bexiga, e não há sinais de
recidiva. O paciente assinou um termo de consentimento livre e esclarecido por meio do qual autorizou o relato de seu caso. Vários estudos
recentes têm analisado os desfechos de pacientes com carcinoma de bexiga submetidos a instilação intravesical terapêutica de BCG. O estudo
de Lamm et al. mostrou que a BCGite disseminada é extremamente rara.( 2 ) Alguns estudos mostraram que, em pacientes com câncer de bexiga,
há uma relação entre as complicações da instilação de BCG e um diagnóstico prévio de tuberculose; essas complicações não ocorrem em
pacientes sem história de tuberculose e sem evidências de sequelas na radiografia de tórax.( 1 ) Neste relato, apresentamos o caso de um
paciente do sexo masculino sem história de tuberculose que apresentou infecção respiratória logo após o tratamento com instilação
intravesical de BCG. As hipóteses diagnósticas iniciais incluíram doença maligna. No entanto, após cuidadosa investigação, o paciente
recebeu diagnóstico de BCGite, sem nenhuma dúvida de que a doença pulmonar ocorrera em virtude da disseminação do BCG usado no tratamento de
seu carcinoma de bexiga. Apesar da raridade dessa complicação, nosso relato de caso ressalta a necessidade de atenção à possibilidade de
disseminação do BCG, já que o bacilo é amplamente usado em pacientes com carcinoma de bexiga.
