Primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs) are characterized by impairment of one or more arms of the immune response, resulting in decreased
defense, an increased number of infections, and, in certain cases, a higher incidence of autoimmune diseases and cancers.( 1 ) Although PIDs
are considered rare diseases, many of them are more common than are those currently diagnosed with the "heel prick" test. The manifestations
of PIDs are heterogeneous and are usually caused by genetic defects of the immune system and its development. Common variable
immunodeficiency (CVI) is the most prevalent of the severe PIDs. A diagnosis of CVI is based on reduced levels of IgG, IgA, and (in some
cases) IgM, together with reduced levels of specific antibodies, after other causes of hypogammaglobulinemia have been excluded.( 2 ) The
incidence of CVI is similar in both genders, with either sporadic or familial distribution. Although it can manifest at any time in life, it
is especially common in adolescence and young adulthood. The most striking characteristics of this disease include hypogammaglobulinemia
associated with frequent infections, especially with encapsulated bacteria, as well as a poor response to immunization protocols.( 3 ) A
27-year-old Black female, who worked as a maid, was admitted to the ER of a tertiary hospital with a 7-day history of productive cough,
fever, and dyspnea. The patient reported a history of asthma, recurrent pneumonia, and some episodes of furunculosis. In addition, she
reported that, one month prior, she had been hospitalized for five days because of pneumonia and that the frequency of such infections had
increased in the last five years. The initial examination revealed fever, an SpO2 of 84% on room air (digital pulse oximetry), a heart rate
of 120 bpm, and an arterial pressure of 90/60 mmHg. A chest X-ray of the chest showed right pleural effusion as well as pneumonic
infiltrates in the middle third and lower lobe of the left lung (Figure 1). The patient was started on antibiotic therapy to treat the
pulmonary focus and underwent thoracentesis followed by chest tube drainage, on the right side, because of empyema. Figure 1.Chest X-ray
showing right pleural effusion as well as pneumonic infiltrates in the middle third and lower lobe of the left lung. The patient was found
to be antinuclear factor-negative. Serology for HIV, HTLV, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, Epstein-Barr virus, rubella,
toxoplasmosis, and cytomegalovirus was negative, as was the venereal disease research laboratory test (for syphilis). In addition, sputum
smear microscopy and sputum cultures were negative for tuberculosis and fungi. No bacteria were isolated from blood or pleural fluid
culture. The results of thyroid function testing, anti-thyroglobulin testing, and anti-thyroid peroxidase testing were normal, ruling out
the possibility of autoimmune thyroiditis. Quantification of serum immunoglobulins revealed a persistent decrease in IgA, IgM, and IgG.
Serology was negative for antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs), although the patient had received three doses of the hepatitis
B vaccine. Additional immunological assessment, which included determination of total complement activity (CH50), photoreduction of
nitroblue tetrazolium, and measurement of phagocytosis by neutrophils and mononuclear phagocytes, yielded normal results. On the basis of
the clinical picture, findings from history taking, and laboratory test results, a diagnosis of CVI was made and the patient was started on
human immunoglobulin replacement therapy (600 mg/kg), which resulted in rapid clinical and radiological improvement. Two months after
admission, the patient was discharged to follow-up in the pulmonology and allergy/immunodeficiency outpatient clinics for continuation of
her immunoglobulin replacement therapy (monthly administration). Recurrent pneumonia can result in bronchiectasis and forms part of the core
clinical picture of CVI. Among PIDs, CVI is the second most common, although it is believed to be underdiagnosed. Its incidence is reported
as 1:10,000 among individuals of European descent, being rare among Asians, with a reported incidence of 1:2,000,000 individuals in Japan.(
4 ) To date, there have been no studies investigating its incidence in the Black population. Encapsulated bacteria, such as Streptococcus
pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae, are combated by IgG2 subclass antibodies to polysaccharide antigens. In the absence of such
immunoglobulins, as in cases of CVI, patients experience sinopulmonary infections, especially pneumonia, bronchitis, sinusitis, and otitis.(
1 , 2 ) Infections with atypical bacteria, such as some species of the genus Mycoplasma, have also been reported. ( 5 ) Often, patients
experience tonsillitis, otitis, and giardiasis in childhood, all of which are facilitated by IgA deficiency, and, in adolescence or young
adulthood, develop recurrent pneumonia, which is characteristic of IgG deficiency, suggesting that CVI is the result of progression of IgA
deficiency.( 6 ) The patient in question had been immunized against hepatitis B, as recommended, having received all three doses of the
vaccine. Nevertheless, she tested negative for anti-HBs, i.e., she had deficient production of specific protein antibodies, which also
occurs in CVI.( 2 ) In this PID, there can be deficient production of other specific antibodies, especially those to polysaccharide
antigens, and the pneumococcal vaccination status of the patient must therefore be taken into account. Patients with CVI have normal or
slightly reduced B lymphocyte counts. However, because of problems intrinsic to B lymphocytes, they can lack the ability to differentiate
into antibody-producing plasma cells, might not function properly as antigen-presenting cells to T helper lymphocytes, or might not receive
sufficient assistance from T helper lymphocytes, all of which can impair the response to immunizations and infections. ( 3 - 7 ) Such
problems are probably due to disturbances in the expression of surface molecules on B lymphocytes or T helper lymphocytes, intracellular
enzyme activity disturbances, or increased apoptosis.( 8 ) The prevalence of chronic pulmonary complications at CVI diagnosis is high
(27.0-34.2%).( 9 ) The most common such complication is bronchiectasis. Extensive pneumonia and the chronicity of infectious pulmonary
episodes are responsible for the poor prognosis in CVI patients.( 10 ) Bronchiectasis can accompany diseases and conditions other than CVI,
including tuberculosis, aspergillosis, cystic fibrosis,alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, AIDS, cancer, systemic lupus erythematosus, and
rheumatoid arthritis. Therefore, it is necessary to make the differential diagnosis, whether it is based on findings from history taking or
on ancillary test results. The treatment for patients with CVI includes administering human immunoglobulin replacement therapy and combating
infections. Immunoglobulin preparations contain neutralizing antibodies against a wide variety of bacteria and viruses, reflecting the
immunological memory of the donors, and should be administered every three or four weeks. We believe that CVI should be borne in mind by
health professionals who treat patients with recurrent pneumonia. Typically manifesting in adulthood, CVI is a PID that must be diagnosed
early so that prompt treatment can be instituted, thereby lowering morbidity, improving quality of life, and, in many cases, making survival
possible for these patients. As imunodeficiências primárias (IDPs) são caracterizadas pelo comprometimento de um ou mais setores da resposta
imunológica, resultando em menor defesa, aumento de infecções e, em certos casos, maior incidência de doenças autoimunes e neoplasias.( 1 )
São consideradas doenças raras, embora muitas delas sejam mais frequentes do que as atualmente diagnosticadas pelo "teste do pezinho". Suas
manifestações são heterogêneas e surgem geralmente por defeitos genéticos do sistema imunológico e do seu desenvolvimento. A
imunodeficiência comum variável (ICV) é a mais prevalente entre as IDPs graves. É caracterizada por diminuição de IgG e IgA e/ou IgM, assim
como diminuição de anticorpos específicos, depois de excluídas outras causas de hipogamaglobulinemia. ( 2 ) A incidência de ICV é semelhante
nos dois gêneros, com distribuição esporádica ou familiar, podendo se manifestar em qualquer época da vida, principalmente em adolescentes e
adultos jovens. As características mais marcantes dessa doença são a hipogamaglobulinemia associada a infecções frequentes, principalmente
por bactérias encapsuladas, além de resposta deficitária a protocolos de imunizações.( 3 ) Uma mulher, negra, 27 anos, doméstica, foi
admitida no PS de um hospital terciário com quadro de tosse produtiva, febre e dispneia há sete dias. Na história clínica, referia asma,
pneumonias de repetição e alguns episódios de furunculose ao longo da vida. Relatava internação há um mês por pneumonia, durante cinco dias,
e referia aumento da frequência dessas infecções nos últimos cinco anos. Ao exame inicial, apresentava-se febril, taquidispneica, SpO2 de
84% em ar ambiente por oximetria digital, frequência cardíaca de 120 bpm e pressão arterial de 90/60 mmHg. A imagem radiológica de tórax
mostrou derrame pleural à direita e infiltrado pneumônico em terço médio e em lobo inferior de hemitórax esquerdo (Figura 1). Foi iniciada
antibioticoterapia para o foco pulmonar, assim como foram realizadas toracocentese seguida de drenagem torácica direita devido a empiema.
Figura 1.Radiografia de tórax mostrando derrame pleural à direita e infiltrado pneumônico em terço médio e em lobo inferior de hemitórax
esquerdo. Os exames complementares mostraram-se negativos: FAN, sorologias para HIV, HTLV, hepatites A, B e C, vírus Epstein-Barr, rubéola,
toxoplasmose, citomegalovírus, sífilis (VDRL), baciloscopias de escarro e culturas de escarro para fungos e tuberculose. Não foram isoladas
bactérias na hemocultura e na cultura do líquido pleural. Os exames para função tireoidiana, antitireoglobulina e antitireoperoxidase
mostraram-se normais, afastando-se a possibilidade de tireoidite autoimune. As imunoglobulinas séricas revelaram diminuição persistente de
IgA, IgM e IgG. A sorologia para antígeno de superfície de vírus de hepatite B (anti-HBs) foi não reagente, embora a paciente tivesse
recebido três doses de vacinação. Os demais exames imunológicos foram normais: dosagem do complemento total (CH50), fotorredução do azul de
nitrotetrazólio e ingestão da fagocitose por neutrófilos e por fagócitos mononucleares. Diante do quadro clínico, anamnese e exames
laboratoriais, foi feito o diagnóstico de ICV e indicada a reposição com imunoglobulina humana (600 mg/kg), havendo rápida melhora clínica e
radiológica. Dois meses após a internação, a paciente recebeu alta hospitalar, passando a ser acompanhada nos ambulatórios de pneumologia e
de alergia e imunodeficiências para continuar a reposição de imunoglobulina mensalmente. Pneumonias de repetição podem ter como consequência
bronquiectasias e fazem parte do quadro clínico principal da ICV. Entre as IDPs, a ICV é a segunda mais comum, apesar de se acreditar que
seu diagnóstico seja subestimado. Sua incidência é descrita em 1:10.000 caucasianos, sendo rara em japoneses (1:2.000.000). ( 4 ) Até o
momento, não há estudos sobre sua incidência na população negra. As bactérias encapsuladas, como Streptococcus pneumoniae e Haemophilus
influenzae, são combatidas por anticorpos a antígenos polissacarídeos, contidos na subclasse IgG2. Na falta de tais imunoglobulinas, como na
ICV, o paciente apresenta infecções sinopulmonares, em especial pneumonias, bronquites, sinusites e otites. ( 1 , 2 ) São descritas ainda
infecções por bactérias atípicas, como algumas espécies do gênero Mycoplasma. ( 5 ) Muitas vezes os pacientes apresentam quadros de
amigdalites, otites e giardíase na infância, facilitados pela deficiência de IgA e, quando adolescentes ou adultos jovens, passam a ter
pneumonias de repetição, características da deficiência de IgG, sugerindo que a ICV possa ser uma evolução da deficiência de IgA.( 6 ) A
paciente em questão havia sido imunizada contra hepatite B, conforme preconizado, recebendo as três doses da vacina. Apesar disso,
apresentava anti-HBs não reagente, ou seja, apresentava deficiência da produção de anticorpos proteicos específicos, o que também ocorre na
ICV.( 2 ) Nessa IDP, pode haver deficiência de outros anticorpos específicos, em especial a antígenos polissacarídeos, tendo-se que levar em
consideração a vacinação antipneumocócica do paciente para essa avaliação. Pacientes com ICV apresentam número normal ou discretamente
diminuído de linfócitos B. Entretanto, esses linfócitos não têm a capacidade para se diferenciar em plasmócitos bons produtores de
anticorpos, não atuam perfeitamente como células apresentadoras de antígenos para linfócitos T auxiliares ou não recebem a cooperação
suficiente de linfócitos T auxiliares, devido a problemas intrínsecos dessas células: tais fatos prejudicam a resposta a imunizações e
infecções. ( 3 - 7 ) Essas alterações provavelmente são devidas a distúrbios da expressão de moléculas de superfície em linfócitos B e/ou T
auxiliares, da atividade enzimática intracelular ou do aumento da apoptose.( 8 ) Complicações pulmonares crônicas têm alta prevalência
(27,0-34,2%) no momento em que se diagnostica a ICV.( 9 ) As bronquiectasias são as complicações clínicas mais frequentes dessa doença.
Pneumonias extensas e a cronicidade de eventos infecciosos pulmonares são responsáveis por determinar um pior prognóstico para o paciente.(
10 ) Além da ICV, outras doenças podem cursar com bronquiectasias: tuberculose, aspergilose, fibrose cística, deficiência de alfa-1
antitripsina, AIDS, neoplasias, lúpus eritematoso sistêmico, artrite reumatoide, dentre outras, tornando-se necessário o diagnóstico de
exclusão, seja por anamnese, seja por exames complementares. O tratamento para pacientes com ICV inclui a reposição de imunoglobulina humana
e combate às infecções. As preparações de imunoglobulina contêm anticorpos neutralizantes contra uma grande variedade de bactérias e vírus,
refletindo a memória imunológica dos doadores, e devem ser administradas a cada três ou quatro semanas. Acreditamos que a ICV deva ser
lembrada entre os profissionais de saúde que cuidam de pacientes com pneumonias de repetição. É uma IDP que geralmente se manifesta na vida
adulta e que deve ser diagnosticada precocemente para uma rápida instituição terapêutica, gerando menor morbidade, melhorando a qualidade de
vida e, muitas vezes, possibilitando a sobrevida desses pacientes.
