A 57-year-old woman presented with an abdominal mass requiring investigation. She was asymptomatic from a respiratory standpoint. Laboratory
test results were unremarkable. A CT scan of the abdomen showed bilateral, fat-containing renal masses and cysts in the lung bases. An HRCT
scan showed scattered lung cysts (Figure 1). Figure 1.HRCT scan showing multiple, round, thin-walled cysts distributed homogeneously
throughout the lungs. The remainder of the lung parenchyma is unremarkable. Note that some of the cysts are located in the lung bases. The
patient basically had diffuse lung cysts on HRCT examination. Cysts are characterized by rounded areas of low attenuation in the lung
parenchyma and a well-defined interface with the normal adjacent lung. They are distinguishable from pulmonary emphysema because they have
no arterioles at their center and usually have an identifiable wall. The cyst wall is usually thin, but it can vary in thickness. Cysts
usually contain air but occasionally contain fluid. A cystic pattern is encountered in a number of diseases, the most common being
lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM), Langerhans cell histiocytosis, lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia (LIP), and Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHDS).
Clinically, cysts are usually asymptomatic or accompanied by dyspnea and are often discovered in routine tests or when complications, such
as pneumothorax, occur. Some clinical and tomographic criteria can be useful for the differential diagnosis. In LIP, cysts are less numerous
and can be associated with ground-glass opacities. Frequently, LIP occurs in patients with immunological diseases, especially Sjögren's
syndrome. In Langerhans cell histiocytosis, cyst shapes can be more bizarre and, more importantly, cysts predominate in the upper lung
fields, sparing the lung bases, especially the costophrenic sulci. Two syndromic conditions can present with lung cysts and renal masses:
tuberous sclerosis and BHDS. In BHDS, cysts are less numerous, are larger, and predominate in the lower lobes. Renal masses, as a rule,
correspond to malignant tumors. In tuberous sclerosis, cysts correspond to LAM, are more numerous and diffuse, and also affect the lung
bases. Renal masses are benign in nature and are angiomyolipomas. Tuberous sclerosis is a genetic syndrome, caused by mutations in the TSC1
or TSC2 gene, and is characterized by formation of hamartomas in multiple organs or organ systems. Despite the recent advent of genetic
testing for TSC gene mutations, diagnosis continues to be based on clinical criteria. A definitive diagnosis can be made when patients have
at least two of the following findings: cardiac rhabdomyomas; cortical tubers; facial angiofibromas; hypermelanotic macules; LAM; renal
angiomyolipomas, retinal hamartomas; Shagreen patches; subependymal giant cell astrocytomas; subependymal nodules; or ungual fibromas. In
the case of this patient, taking into account the presence of numerous diffuse cysts in the lung bases, as well as of fat-containing renal
masses (angiomyolipomas), the final diagnosis was tuberous sclerosis-associated LAM. Mulher, 57 anos, com massa abdominal a esclarecer.
Assintomática do ponto de vista respiratório. Exames laboratoriais normais. A TC de abdome evidenciou massas renais bilaterais, com conteúdo
gorduroso e cistos nas bases dos pulmões. A TCAR mostrou cistos pulmonares disseminados (Figura 1). Figura 1.TCAR evidenciando múltiplos
cistos arredondados, de paredes finas, distribuídos homogeneamente pelos pulmões. O restante do parênquima pulmonar é normal. Observar que
alguns dos cistos situam-se nas bases pulmonares. A paciente apresentava basicamente cistos pulmonares difusos na TCAR. Cistos caracterizam-
se por áreas arredondadas de baixo coeficiente de atenuação no parênquima pulmonar, com uma interface bem definida com o pulmão normal
adjacente. Eles são diferenciáveis do enfisema pulmonar por não conter arteríolas no seu centro e, geralmente, apresentar parede
identificável. A espessura da parede do cisto pode variar, sendo normalmente fina. Cistos geralmente contêm ar, mas, ocasionalmente, podem
conter líquido. O padrão cístico é observado em uma série de doenças, sendo as mais características a linfangioleiomiomatose (LAM), a
histiocitose de células de Langerhans, a pneumonia intersticial linfocítica (PIL) e a síndrome de Birt-Hogg-Dubé (SBHD). Clinicamente, os
cistos em geral são assintomáticos ou cursam com dispneia e muitas vezes são descobertos em exames de rotina ou devido a complicações, como
o pneumotórax. Alguns critérios clínicos e tomográficos podem servir para o diagnóstico diferencial. Na PIL, os cistos são menos numerosos e
podem estar associados a opacidades em vidro fosco. A PIL frequentemente ocorre em pacientes com doenças imunológicas, especialmente
síndrome de Sjögren. Na histiocitose de células de Langerhans, os cistos podem ter formas mais bizarras e, mais importante, predominam nos
campos pulmonares superiores, preservando as bases pulmonares, especialmente os seios costofrênicos. Dois quadros sindrômicos podem cursar
com cistos pulmonares e massas renais: a esclerose tuberosa e a SBHD. Na SBHD, os cistos são menos numerosos, maiores, e predominam nos
lobos inferiores. As massas renais correspondem, em regra, a tumores malignos. Na esclerose tuberosa, os cistos correspondem a LAM, sendo
mais numerosos e difusos, acometendo também as bases pulmonares. As massas renais são de natureza benigna, do tipo angiomiolipomas. A
esclerose tuberosa é uma síndrome genética, causada por mutações nos genes TSC1 ou TSC2, e caracteriza-se pela formação de hamartomas em
múltiplos órgãos ou sistemas. Não obstante o recente advento dos testes genéticos para mutações dos genes TSC, o diagnóstico continua a
basear-se em critérios clínicos. O diagnóstico definitivo pode ser feito quando o paciente apresenta pelo menos dois dos seguintes achados:
rabdomiomas cardíacos, tubérculos corticais, angiofibromas faciais, máculas hipermelanóticas, LAM, angiomiolipomas renais, hamartomas de
retina, placas de Shagreen, astrocitomas de células gigantes subependimais, nódulos subependimais ou fibromas ungueais. No caso desta
paciente, levando-se em conta a presença de cistos numerosos e difusos acometendo as bases pulmonares, associados a massas renais com
presença de gordura (angiomiolipomas), o diagnóstico final foi de LAM em paciente com esclerose tuberosa.
