The aims are to present a case series of Twiddler’s syndrome in spinal cord stimulators with analysis of the possible mechanism of this
syndrome and discuss how this phenomenon can be prevented. Data were collected retrospectively between 2007 and 2013 for all patients
presenting with failure of spinal cord stimulators. The diagnostic criterion for Twiddler’s syndrome is radiological evidence of twisting of
wires in the presence of failure of spinal cord stimulation. Our unit implants on average 110 spinal cord stimulators a year. Over the
5-year study period, all consecutive cases of spinal cord stimulation failure were studied. Three patients with Twiddler’s syndrome were
identified. Presentation ranged from 4 to 228 weeks after implantation. Imaging revealed repeated rotations and twisting of the wires of the
spinal cord stimulators leading to hardware failure. To the best of our knowledge this is the first reported series of Twiddler’s syndrome
with implantable pulse generators (IPGs) for spinal cord stimulation. Hardware failure is not uncommon in spinal cord stimulation. Awareness
and identification of Twiddler’s syndrome may help prevent its occurrence and further revisions. This may be achieved by implanting the IPG
in the lumbar region subcutaneously above the belt line. Psychological intervention may have a preventative role for those who are deemed at
high risk of Twiddler’s syndrome from initial psychological screening. Twiddler’s syndrome is rare clinical condition. It is commonly been
reported in cardiac pacemakers and implantable cardioverter defribrillators [5, 7, 12, 13, 19, 24, 27, 28, 30, 32, 39]. In neurosurgical
practice, Twiddler’s syndrome has been reported in deep brain stimulation but never in spinal cord stimulation (SCS) [3, 9, 16, 17, 21, 31,
34]. To the best of our knowledge, we present the first reported case series of hardware malfunction due to Twiddler’s syndrome in SCS.
Bayliss et al. were the first to report this phenomenon in cardiac pacemakers in 1968. In their case report, it was found that the rotation
of the wires was a result of twiddling by the patient. Twiddler’s syndrome can be a conscious or subconscious manipulation of an implantable
pulse generator (IPG) within its subcutaneous pocket. This ultimately leads to hardware failure, which is often the mode of presentation.
There are many components of an SCS and each providing a possible point of failure. Hardware failure can be due to breakage, infection,
migration . In Twiddler’s syndrome in addition to the radiological evidence, there is raised impedance leading to system failure, loss of
capture and a recurrence of symptoms. An average of 110 spinal cord stimulators are inserted per year in our unit. All patients presenting
with failure of spinal cord stimulators between 2007 and 2013 were reviewed to identify those with evidence of Twiddler’s syndrome. Three
patients with radiological evidence of Twiddler’s syndrome were identified. Informed consent was obtained from these three patients to be
included in this study. Radiological evidence consisted of twisting and rotation of the wires. Their case notes, images and management were
reviewed. All patients underwent a pain management program (PMP) and psychological assessment prior to considering implanting an SCS. Our
department’s policy is to obtain routine postoperative radiological images for all cases of SCS as a baseline. In cases of clinical failure
of the device, investigations include interrogating the device and radiological imaging to exclude disconnections, lead breaks and other
causes of hardware failure. A 54-year-old woman with failed back surgery syndrome following a lumbar microdiscectomy had a spinal cord
stimulator inserted in October 2009. A Specify 5-6-5 electrode (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was implanted with the connectors tunnelled
subcutaneously and connected to the IPG in the right iliac fossa. There were no intraoperative or postoperative complications. The patient
experienced good relief of lower limb pain with stimulation. At the point of insertion, she weighed 78.8 kg, with a height of 157 cm (body
mass index , 31.9). Her pre-PMP assessment revealed moderate levels of depression and high levels of pain-related disability. Her Beck
Depression Inventory score was 18 (mild). She had a Pain Anxiety Symptoms Scale of 60 (mean, 94; SD, 39; range 0–200, where 0 = no pain
anxiety and 200 = severe pain anxiety). In October 2011, she underwent reprogramming with failure to achieve satisfactory stimulation. Her
imaging revealed twisting of the connecting wires adjacent to the pulse generator (Fig. 1). As it was still partially functioning, she chose
to defer revision surgery. Eventually the device failed completely. In May 2012, her IPG was repositioned with new connector leads. The
connector wires were found knotted and twisted intraoperatively. The new wires were tunnelled to the right lumbar region above the belt
line. No further problems have been reported on follow-up.Fig. 1Lateral plain abdominal X-ray showing twisting of the connecting wires
adjacent to the IPG Lateral plain abdominal X-ray showing twisting of the connecting wires adjacent to the IPG A 31-year-old woman with
failed back surgery syndrome following a right lumbar microdiscectomy. Her weight was 93.1 kg and height 165 cm (BMI, 34.2). In her pre-PMP
assessment, she had moderate depression, moderate pain-related disability and average scores on pain distress and intensity. A percutaneous
trial of spinal cord stimulation was judged positive and therefore the patient opted for permanent spinal cord stimulator insertion. An
eight-electrode surgical lead was implanted with the IPG in the iliac fossa. Postoperatively there was good reduction in pain scores,
analgesic usage and mobility; plain X-ray indicated satisfactory electrode placement. Four weeks after insertion, symptoms recurred to
preoperative levels. Interrogation of the system revealed high impedances suggestive of electrode failure. X-ray of the system indicated an
abnormal twisting of the wiring between the implanted abdominal pulse generator and the spinal electrode. The subcutaneous pulse generator
had undergone repeated rotation, twisting the connecting leads to the point of fracture (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Lateral plain abdominal X-ray showing
multiple twists of the connecting wires adjacent to the IPG Lateral plain abdominal X-ray showing multiple twists of the connecting wires
adjacent to the IPG Surgical revision of the system was performed. The X-ray findings were confirmed intraoperatively. The IPG had rotated
on its axis many times (Fig. 3). A new pulse generator was implanted in her right lumbar region above the iliac crest and belt line.
Postoperatively, the patient reported restoration of good pain relief.Fig. 3IPG with twisted wires after removal from patient IPG with
twisted wires after removal from patient A 50-year-old woman who initially presented with cauda equina syndrome secondary to a L5/S1 disc
prolapse was later diagnosed with failed back surgery syndrome. She weighed 96.95 kg, with a height of 1.57 (BMI, 39.3). This lady had a
pain anxiety and symptom scale score of 152 (mean, 94; SD, 39; range, 0–200). On the Becks depression scale, she scored 48 (severe
depression). She had a trial of spinal cord stimulation in 2008, which achieved good control of her pain symptoms. She proceeded to have a
spinal cord stimulator (5-6-5 electrode) inserted permanently at the level of T10-12 with connectors tunnelled to the right iliac fossa. She
had good control of her back pain initially; however, during follow-up her pain control deteriorated. In late 2009, she complained of her
IPG being mobile and catching on her clothes and it was re-sited at that point. In 2013, she presented with SCS failure. X-rays showed signs
of Twiddler’s syndrome. On revision of her SCS, the whole extension wires were badly twisted and damaged. She had a replacement extension
set tunnelled and connected to the main electrodes, with the IPG repositioned to the lumbar region. In all three cases the surgical
technique included anchoring the lead with the included manufacturer anchoring system. This was by suturing the anchoring system to the
lumbar fascia. It was not our policy to anchor the pulse generator in its subcutaneous pocket in the primary surgical procedure. All three
patients denied manipulating the IPG. In the revision procedure in all three cases, the IPG was implanted in the lumbar region (Fig. 4).Fig.
4Schematic diagram illustrating IPG site for revision cases Schematic diagram illustrating IPG site for revision cases To the best of our
knowledge and following a literature research by two independent investigators, we present the first reported case series on Twiddler’s
syndrome in SCS. All patients were female, aged between 31 and 54 years and all patients had varying degrees of depression and anxiety.
Their BMI ranged between 31.9 and 39.3, which falls into the obese category according to the WHO classification . There was no pattern to
the timing of presentation, which ranged from 4 to 228 weeks after implantation. Our patients underwent validated psychological testing,
which consisted of the Becks Depression Inventory and the Pain Anxiety Symptoms Scale prior to treatment which revealed varying degrees of
depression and fear of pain. The first SCS was implanted by Shealy et al. in 1967 . Hardware failure is not an uncommon complication with
SCS and it is reported to occur most commonly within the first 2 years after implantation [25, 43]. In Twiddler’s syndrome with other
implantable devices, presentation is reported between 6 months and 3 years [3, 9, 16, 17, 21, 31, 34, 39]. Hardware-related complications in
SCS have different aetiologies, including lead migration/fracture, electrical shorting-out with cessation of stimulation, infection,
decreased stimulation and battery end of life. Such complications have been reported to be between 22 and 27.2 % is SCS [25, 41]. Hardware
malfunction in Twiddler’s syndrome is due to lead coiling, which can cause displacement and lead fracture [9, 16, 20, 34]. Twisting of the
wires in such a manner has not been reported with SCS previously [8, 23, 26]. Twiddler’s syndrome typically presents with loss of
stimulation, resulting in a recurrence of symptoms [32, 34]. There may be pain along the course of the wires due to movement and traction of
the wires. Although Twiddler’s syndrome is a rare condition, there may be an element of under-reporting of Twiddler’s syndrome due to the
lack of awareness of this problem in SCS. Twiddler’s syndrome has most commonly been described with cardiac pacemakers and defibrillators
[5, 7, 12, 13, 19, 24, 27, 28, 30, 32, 39]. More recently it has been described in deep brain stimulation [3, 9, 16, 17, 21, 31, 34]. Table
1 summarises all cases of Twiddler’s syndrome reported in the literature with different implants. The aetiology of Twiddler’s syndrome is
not completely understood; however, some have found an association with obese women [7, 12, 16, 24, 34]. With increased subcutaneous tissue,
rotation of the device may occur during normal activity, which in turn can lead to wire coiling on the IPG. In one case series , the
patients admitted to actively twisting the IPG. However, in most reports patients deny manipulating the IPG. Physical activity has been
postulated as a causative factor in IPGs implanted in the pectoral region [7, 16, 34]. An association has been noted with neurological and
psychological conditions such as dementia, obsessive-compulsive disorders, seizures, depression and anxiety [9, 10, 20, 22, 34]. All
patients in this series denied manipulating their IPGs. All our patients with Twiddler’s had moderate to severe depression on preoperative
psychological screening.Table 1Reported cases of Twiddler’s syndrome in the literatureAuthor/YearCountryDevice involvedBaseline
characteristicsCausesInterventionFrizell et al. 2015 USAPacemaker/ defibrillator53-year-old femaleNot stated but patient was frequently
touching her incisionDenied manipulationLead revisionDattilo et al. 2015 ItalyICD76-year-old maleManipulation by patient with presence of
scratches around pocketsTied device with silk to pectoral muscle, repair sleeves to leadsSilva et al. 2014 PortugalDBS – bilateral
subthalamic nucleus stimulation65-year-old femaleParkinson’s diseaseMild medically compensated reactive depressionDenied manipulationNo
causative factor identifiedRevision surgery to replace damaged leadsRaissuni et al. 2014 FranceICD70-year-old femaleDenied manipulationNo
causative factor identifiedDevice replaced and sutured tightly to underlying muscleGarweg et al. 2014 BelgiumDual chamber cardioverter
defibrillation72-year-old maleSpontaneousDenied manipulationGenerator fixed in pocket with ligatureStryjewski et al. 2014
PolandPacemaker77-year-old malePsycho-organic syndromeNot statedNew lead inserted and pacemaker fixed to muscle with non-absorbable
sutureBali et al. 2013 IndiaPacemakerElderly femaleOver enthusiastic masseuseRepositioning leads with standard suturing techniqueTrout et
al. 2013 USAVagal nerve stimulator8-year-old maleADHDLifelong intractable seizuresAutistic behavioursGlobal developmental arrestManipulation
of the device by childNot statedLiang et al. 2013 USAPacemaker52-year-old femaleNot statedLead revision and device reinforcement in its
pocket to fascia or subpectoral placementMeghetti et al. 2013 ItalyDBS – posteroventral globus pallidus43-year-old femaleManipulation of IPG
by patientIPG positioned in a submuscular pocket and fixed to fasciaAhmed et al. 2013 UKICD60-year-old maleNot statedRepositioning of leads
and anchoring the device to the pectoral muscleGonzalez Bermudez et al. 2012 SpainICD74-year-old femaleDenied manipulation.Spontaneous
rotation of deviceRepositioning of leads and generator attached to pectoral muscleGrapsa et al. 2013 UKPacemaker86-year-old maleParkinson’s
syndromePatient manipulated pacing box due to Parkinson’s diseaseReprogramming of the deviceAli et al. 2012 USAICD44-year-old
femaleObesityUsed left arm to carry heavy shopping bags (implantation of ICD in left pectoral region)Occasionally touched and scratched
skinDenied manipulationLead uncoiled and repositioned. IPG repositioned.Penn et al. 2012 USADBS – bilateral anterior nuclei of the
thalamus21-year-old femaleEpilepsy, no psychiatric historyNot statedNew extensions inserted and sutured. Fascial suture to anchor IPG in a
polyester pouchPavlidis et al. 2011 GreecePacemaker82-year-old femaleSeverely impaired mental statusConscious or unconscious manipulation of
the pulse generatorNot statedAstradsson et al. 2010 UKDBS65-year-old femaleDenied manipulationLoose IPG in a large pocket with conscious or
unconscious twiddlingRevision of leads secured underneath the IPG and fixed. Further revision and IPG secured with a prolene meshBayliss et
al. 1968 CanadaPacemaker79-year-old femaleManipulation of deviceLoose pocketRepositioning of the leadsBracke et al. 2005
NetherlandsICD60/59/50-year-old patientsDenied manipulationAll had history of recent strenuous physical exercise, one recurred after
swimmingNo obesityRepositioning of leadsBurdick et al. 2010 USADBS79-year-old female with depression with episodes of suicidal ideation,
anxiety74-year-old male, BMI 46.771-year-old female, Parkinson’s diseaseDenies manipulation.Patient felt spontaneous movement of IPGLeads
and IPG anchored the fascia with silk suturesCastillo et al. 2006 USAPacemaker76-year-old maleDementiaManipulation of the deviceConversion
of pacemaker mode and restrictive recommendations to prevent manipulationDe Buitleir et al. 1996 USAICD54-year-old femaleObesityDenies
manipulation but on waking in the morning notices the ICD sitting on the sideLead revisionFemenia et al. 2010 ArgentinaPacemaker74-year-old
femaleMoving arms energeticallyIPG anchored to pocketGeissinger et al. 2007 USADBS65-year-old femalePatient felt IPG shiftedIPG placed into
a polyester pouch and secure to surrounding tissueGelabert-Gonzalez et al. 2010 SpainDBS68-year-old female, Parkinson’s disease65-year-old
femalePatient admitted twisting the generator.Replacement of the electrode and extension wiresHarel et al. 2008 IsraelPacemaker69-year-old
femaleNot statedRe-implantation of electrodeIsrael et al. 2008 IsraelDBS – bilateral thalamic surgery65-year-old femaleNo psychiatric
historyPatient complained of an itching sensation over incision and was advised to gently massage the incisionLeads revision and IPG sutured
to periosteum and fascia with silk sutures, subcutaneous pocket contracted by suturesJaafari et al. 2009 FranceICD47-year-old
maleObsessional personality traitsSince the implantation the patient had increased anxiety and described fears of having chest pain and of
dying as well as receiving shocks which led to compulsive checking behaviour of ICDPatient underwent cognitive behavioural therapy and
antidepressantsLal et al. 1990 USAPacemaker89-year-old maleNot statedRepositioned leads and re-anchored using suture sleeve and pacemaker
suture to pectoralis minor muscleMehta et al. 1992 USAICD45-year-old, sex not statedObeseDenied manipulation but reported local discomfort
and excessive device mobilityReplacement of leads and generator re-implanted with a Dacron patchNicholson et al. 2003 USAPacemaker75-year-
old malePatient had been spinning the pulse generator in its surgical pocketPacing leads replaced and additional suture were added to secure
the pacemaker body to the fascia in the surgical pocketSidhu et al. 2009 USAPacemaker73-year-old femaleNot statedReplacement of pacemaker
ICD Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, ADHD attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, DBS deep brain stimulator, IPG internal pulse
generator Reported cases of Twiddler’s syndrome in the literature ICD Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, ADHD attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, DBS deep brain stimulator, IPG internal pulse generator Reported measures to reduce the incidence of IPG
displacement and Twiddler’s syndrome include suture sleeves [27, 30]. Others have used prolene mesh, non-absorbable sutures, anchoring the
IPG to the fascia, placing the IPG in a submuscular plane and limiting the pocket size to prevent further occurrences of Twiddler’s syndrome
[3, 17, 21, 31, 34]. We suggest that the relocation of the IPG to above the iliac crest allows the IPG to be anchored to the lumbar fascia.
Twiddler’s syndrome maybe less likely to occur with an IPG in this position as it is less accessible and visible to the patient. This
approach has the added advantage of good access to the spine lead and IPG site simultaneously in the prone position. Another measure that
may help prevent Twiddler’s syndrome may be psychological intervention in those identified at risk of manipulating their IPGs . To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first reported series of Twiddler’s syndrome with IPGs for spinal cord stimulation. There are many factors
that may contribute to Twiddler’s syndrome including the patient’s weight, site of implantation and psychological disorders. Based on our
case series, implanting the IPG in the lumbar region subcutaneously above the iliac crest may prevent recurrence of Twiddler’s syndrome.
This approach has the added advantage of easier access to the spine with tunnelling in the prone position. Psychological screening may aid
in identifying those at risk of Twiddler’s syndrome. No funding was received for this research. All authors certify that they have no
affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any financial interest (such as honoraria; educational grants;
participation in speakers’ bureaus; membership, employment, consultancies, stock ownership, or other equity interest; and expert testimony
or patent-licensing arrangements), or non-financial interest (such as personal or professional relationships, affiliations, knowledge or
beliefs) in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript. All procedures performed in studies involving human participants
were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration
and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. For this retrospective study formal consent is not required. Informed consent was
obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
