Splenic artery aneurysm rupture is rare and potentially fatal. It has largely been reported in pregnant patients and typically not diagnosed
until laparotomy. This case reports a constellation of clinical and sonographic findings that may lead clinicians to rapidly diagnose
ruptured splenic artery aneurysm at the bedside. We also propose a rapid, but systematic sonographic approach to patients with atraumatic
hemoperitoneum causing shock. It is yet another demonstration of the utility of bedside ultrasound in critically ill patients, specifically
with undifferentiated shock. Ruptured splenic artery aneurysm (SAA) is a rare condition that is challenging to diagnose given the
nonspecific presentation. Non-specific abdominal pain is common in the emergency department (ED) representing 4–5% of complaints.1 The
incidence of SAAs is low, seen incidentally in only 0.78% of patients undergoing angiography.2 Of these, only about 10% will rupture.3 We
report a case of splenic artery aneurysm rupture that emphasizes the value of ultrasound performed in the ED in shortening the differential,
decreasing time to diagnosis, and altering the management plan with benefits in patient outcome. This study did not need to be approved by
our university’s institutional review board, as case studies are not considered by our institution to be “human subjects’ research.” A
41-year-old woman presented to the ED with sharp, stabbing chest pain radiating into the abdomen and the back with nausea and diaphoresis.
She reported diffuse abdominal pain for several months, and admitted to only occasional alcohol use. Cholecystectomy was her only surgical
history. Initial vital signs were BP 82/60 and pulse 110. Physical examination showed a diffusely tender abdomen with increased pain in the
left upper quadrant and epigastric regions. Vital signs improved initially with an intravenous (IV) fluid bolus. The initial differential
included upper gastrointestinal bleeding, sepsis, myocardial infarction, aortic emergencies, pregnancy complications including ectopic, and
perforated viscus. Chest radiograph and electrocardiogram were normal. Despite initial stabilization, the patient again became hypotensive
with signs of profound shock including an ashen appearance, decreased mental status, and weak, thready pulses. A bedside ultrasound was
performed to evaluate the patient’s physiology and potential etiology of shock. The cardiac views were limited but showed no effusion or
obvious right ventricular dilation, and left ventricular function appeared vigorous (Figure 1, Frame 1). The visualized portions of the
abdominal aorta were of normal caliber as seen in Figure 1, Frame 2. Extensive free peritoneal fluid with areas of increased and mixed
echogenicity was noted in Morison’s pouch (Figure 1, Frame 3, and Video), the paracolic gutters and pelvis (Figure 1, Frame 4, and Video).
There was extensive clot formation in the epigastrium and left upper quadrant (Figure 2, Frames 1–3) but not surrounding the spleen, which
appeared normal (Figure 2, Frame 4). There were no obvious adnexal masses (Figures not available due to technical machine storage
malfunction) and the previously ordered human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) had returned negative. At this point the differential was
modified and included spontaneous splenic rupture, but from previous clinician experience, this was felt less likely due to the normal
appearance of the spleen on ultrasound. Hemorrhagic pancreatitis was considered, but the extent of intraperitoneal hemorrhage and clinical
presentation did not appear consistent. Ruptured ectopic pregnancy and hemorrhagic ovarian cyst were also felt unlikely given the lack of
adnexal mass and negative HCG. SAA was felt the most likely diagnosis given the overall clinical and sonographic findings, specifically
diffuse atraumatic hemoperitoneum, the localized clot formation in the epigastrium and left upper quadrant and lack of findings to support
other differential considerations. Adequate IV access was assured and resuscitation with blood was initiated while the patient was taken
immediately to radiology for computed tomography (CT) angiography, which showed multiple SAAs and ongoing hemorrhage. Interventional
radiology and surgery were consulted. The patient was taken to a dual angiography/operating room suite where splenic artery embolization was
performed, followed by open evacuation of hematoma, splenectomy, distal pancreatectomy and further hemorrhage control. Resuscitation
followed a massive transfusion protocol, resulting in total administration of seven units of packed red blood cells, four units of fresh
frozen plasma, one unit each of platelets and cryoprecipitate, in addition to autotransfusion during surgery. She did well postoperatively.
Ruptured SAAs are an uncommon cause of hemorrhagic shock but the splenic artery accounts for 60% of visceral aneurysms.2 SAAs have a 4:1
female to male ratio statistically related to multiparity with a mean of 3.5 pregnancies.2 This is believed to be related to hormonal
influences and increased splenic arterial wall stress from portal hypertension during pregnancy. Portal hypertension from other causes is
also believed to be a contributing factor.2 Our patient had no known risk factors for a ruptured SAA other than her female gender, making
her low probability for this diagnosis. After rupture, SAAs cause significant blood loss with hemodynamic instability typically occurring in
6–96 hours, giving time for repair if diagnosed. The mortality ranges from 10–36% in non-pregnant patients3–4 but doubles for pregnant
patients and those with pre-existing portal hypertension.4 Rapid diagnosis and intervention are critical. Initial presentation of rupture is
chest pain followed by hemodynamic instability 6–96 hours later. The delayed blood loss is caused by the “double rupture phenomenon,” where
blood is initially contained within the lesser omental sac, delaying the onset of intraperitoneal hemorrhage.5 This provides a window for
diagnosis and treatment that may reduce the current mortality rate. Ruptured SAA is most frequently reported in pregnancy. Only a few
reported cases described the use of bedside ultrasound to identify hemoperitoneum prior to open laparotomy. Jackson et al.4 described two
cases of females with hemodynamic collapse: one in a patient at 35-weeks gestation and another in a woman with signs of shock and a
suspected obstetric etiology. Grousolles et al.,5 report a woman at 6-weeks gestation presenting with signs of shock and an initial
suspected diagnosis of ruptured ectopic pregnancy. Heitkamp et al.6 report a woman at 31-weeks gestation complaining of sudden severe
abdominal pain and hypotension, with hemoperitoneum on ultrasound, who underwent laparotomy where a suspected ruptured SAA was identified
and surgically treated. The diagnosis of SAA primarily occurs when a CT with contrast is ordered as part of the work up of abdominal pain or
during exploratory surgery for non-traumatic hemoperitoneum. Etiologies of non-traumatic hemoperitoneum with hemodynamic instability include
ruptured vascular neoplasm in a solid organ, spontaneous splenic rupture, ruptured ectopic pregnancy, uterine rupture during pregnancy,
uterine artery rupture, or intraperitoneal abdominal aortic aneurysm rupture. A ruptured hemorrhagic ovarian cyst may cause hemoperitoneum,
but hypotension is atypical.7 When SAA occurs during pregnancy, 70% are initially diagnosed as uterine ruptures.8 When using ultrasound to
assess cases of non-traumatic shock with hemoperitoneum, a careful consideration of the differential diagnosis with a rapid but systematic
sonographic evaluation may suggest the most likely etiology. In this case, the absence of clot or fluid around the spleen implied
spontaneous spleen rupture was unlikely. This belief was based mostly on clinician experience, but there have also been reports of
spontaneous spleen rupture that report splenomegaly, perisplenic hematoma and/or fluid collections as common sonographic findings.9 The
absence of adnexal masses and negative HCG made ectopic or other adnexal etiologies seem unlikely. The normal diameter of the aorta made
intraperitoneal abdominal aortic rupture unlikely. Other uterine pathology was felt unlikely given the grossly normal size of the uterus and
the fact that these are typically complications of later pregnancy. Lastly, the localized, extensive clot formation in the epigastrium and
left upper quadrant strongly suggested a ruptured SAA. Additional analysis with color and Doppler modalities could be considered for similar
cases, but were not performed in this case. Preliminary diagnosis made using a modified rapid ultrasound in shock10 protocol in patients
with hemodynamic instability correlates strongly with final diagnoses,11 suggesting ultrasound has potential in guiding first-line
therapeutic approach as it did in this case. We report a patient who presented with nonspecific complaints and undifferentiated hypotension
where bedside ultrasound assisted in drastically altering the differential. Identifying the rare diagnosis of ruptured splenic artery
aneurysm early led to rapid intervention and a more favorable outcome for the patient. This case further illustrates the utility of bedside
ultrasound in the evaluation of critically ill patients, specifically in undifferentiated shock. We suggest a rapid but systematic
sonographic evaluation to assist in determining the etiology of nontraumatic hemoperitoneum causing shock. The absence of sonographic signs
of other etiologies combined with the finding of extensive clot formation in the epigastrium and left upper quadrant may suggest ruptured
splenic artery aneurysm earlier in the patient’s course, expediting diagnosis and management, and potentially improving outcome. Section
Editor: Rick A. McPheeters, DO Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By
the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management
relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Frame 1 shows a subxiphoid view of the heart
without pericardial effusion or RV dilation. Additonally, left ventricle (LV) function was vigorous. RA-right atrium. Frame 2 shows a
portion of the abdominal aorta with a normal diameter. Frame 3 shows free fluid in Morison’s pouch. Frame 4 shows fluid with mixed and
increased echogenicity in the pelvis consistent with blood (arrows). Frames 1–3 show alternate views of the extensive and organized clot
formation in the epigastrium and left upper quadrant (arrows). Frame 4 shows the spleen which is grossly normal in size and appearance.
Narrated overview of the key findings and video clips. Free peritoneal fluid and intraperitoneal clot is shown as well as a normal appearing
spleen.
