We report what we believe to be the first case of a child affected by two rare vascular diseases complicated by kidney failure and
successfully treated by kidney transplantation. A 3-year-old Caucasian girl with fibromuscular dysplasia and infantile myofibromatosis
presented with arterial hypertension and renal failure. She received a deceased donor kidney transplantation distal to an iliac graft. The
technical peculiarities of this transplantation are described, as well as her favorable long-term outcome. Kidney transplantation may be
considered in a patient with vascular diseases and a history of iliac surgery. Infantile myofibromatosis (IM) is a rare mesenchymal disorder
characterized by the proliferation of tumors in the skin, muscles, bones and viscera. The generalized form involves multiple organs such as
lung, kidney, heart, liver, adrenal glands, thyroid, gastrointestinal tract and small vessels . It has a poor prognosis with a mortality
rate greater than 75 % [2, 3]. Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a fibrous non-atherosclerotic and non-inflammatory disease of the medium and
small arteries . It can be asymptomatic or characterized by vascular dilatation or stenosis, and lead to arterial hypertension, aneurysms
and thrombosis if left untreated [4, 5]. FMD is likely to be, at least in part, a genetic disorder . It is the biggest cause of infantile
renovascular hypertension, for which first treatment consists of antihypertensive medication and, in case of inefficacy, percutaneous
transluminal angioplasty . To the best of our knowledge, there are only two cases of associated IM and FMD reported in the literature, which
is not sufficient to conclude a mutual origin [2, 3]. We report a case of renal failure in a child affected by both generalized IM and FMD,
multiple venous thrombosis and renal failure. She was treated by kidney transplantation (KT) on a vessel-bearing prosthesis. The short
outcome complications and treatment are discussed. The complexity and rarity of this case and the 5 years of follow up with good outcome
make this report valuable. A 3-week-old Caucasian girl, born at 40 weeks after an uneventful pregnancy, was referred for a heart murmur and
failure to thrive. A clinical examination showed increased blood pressure (170/110 mmHg, normal 60–80/30–50 mmHg) and a purple skin nodule
on her right thigh. Echocardiography showed major left ventricular hypertrophy. A biopsy of the nodule was compatible with IM . Radiological
assessment, including abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography of her chest, and a scintigraphic skeletal survey,
showed diffuse muscular and visceral lesions. Chemotherapy with methotrexate and vinblastine was started and resulted in progressive
regression of the lesions. Arterial hypertension was managed by propranolol and captopril. After 2 months, her creatinine clearance rate
went down to 51.8 ml/min/m2 (Schwartz’s formula). A kidney color Doppler ultrasound showed a reduction in size of her right kidney with no
diastolic flow in the artery. Mercaptoacetyltriglycine renal scintigraphy revealed a right-side relative renal function of only 30 %. Her
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 68 mL/min/1.73 m2 (normal ±120 ml/min/1.73 m2). At 2 years of age, an angiography was performed because
of the persistence of hypertension. This showed stenosis of her left renal artery with no perfusion of her left kidney, and two aneurisms
involving her right renal artery and right common iliac artery (Fig. 1). Two Gore-tex grafts of 6 mm diameter each were interposed: the
first one between her right adrenal gland artery and the superior polar branch of her right renal artery, and the second one half way along
the length of her common iliac artery (Fig. 2). She received heparin with the following dosage regimen: 50 UI/kg/day on day 1, 220 UI/kg/day
units on day 2, 280 UI/kg/day units on days 3 and 4, then stopped. However, on the first postoperative day, the renal bypass thrombosed and
our patient developed irreversible kidney failure.Fig. 1Renal angiography (a coronal, b sagittal) showing aneurismal dilatations of the
right renal, the right common iliac and the right internal iliac arteries (arrowheads). The right renal artery shows a proximal stenosis
(black arrowheads). The kidney is mainly perfused by a thin superior branch (open arrowhead)Fig. 2Left renal artery wall: thickened intima
with relatively young conjunctive tissue. The internal elastic lamina is incomplete. The media is sclerotic with scarce elastic cells and
the muscular cells are reduced in number. The adventitia is normal. This observation is compatible with mixed fibromuscular dysplasia, with
both the intima and media being altered. IEL: Internal Elastica lamina Renal angiography (a coronal, b sagittal) showing aneurismal
dilatations of the right renal, the right common iliac and the right internal iliac arteries (arrowheads). The right renal artery shows a
proximal stenosis (black arrowheads). The kidney is mainly perfused by a thin superior branch (open arrowhead) Left renal artery wall:
thickened intima with relatively young conjunctive tissue. The internal elastic lamina is incomplete. The media is sclerotic with scarce
elastic cells and the muscular cells are reduced in number. The adventitia is normal. This observation is compatible with mixed
fibromuscular dysplasia, with both the intima and media being altered. IEL: Internal Elastica lamina Hemodialysis was started with a
catheter inserted in our patient’s right jugular vein thorough to the superior vena cava. After several weeks of hemodialysis, she developed
an extensive thrombosis of her superior caval venous system. Peritoneal dialysis was started, which was complicated by chylous ascites. At
3 years of age (weight 11.7 kg), when her IM was considered to be in remission, she was registered on the waiting list for a KT. The
transplantation took place 2 months later, when an adult deceased donor became available (heart beating donor, weight 63 kg, height 173 cm,
weight ratio 0.196). The kidney was connected to a perfusion machine for 4 hours until anastomosis. The kidney was transplanted on the right
side using an extraperitoneal approach to preserve the peritoneum for dialysis. Because the ultrasound assessment showed no flow in the left
iliac vein of the donor kidney, the left side was not considered for the transplantation. A vascular anastomosis was performed termino-
lateral on the common iliac vein and common iliac artery below the prosthesis. Two running sutures of slowly absorbable 6.0 were used on
each vessel. Her ureter was anastomosed to the bladder using the Lich-Gregoir procedure. Our patient’s immunosuppressive protocol consisted
of anti IL2R antibodies on days 0 and 4, methylprednisolone, mycophenolate mofetil, and tacrolimus (10 ng/ml of trough blood levels).
Prophylaxis by subcutaneous administration of 200 UI/kg/day of low-molecular weight heparin was started. One month after the graft, the
mycophenolate mofetil was switched to azathioprine. Subcutaneous nadroparin (low molecular weight heparin) was continued daily with
diminishing doses. The graft function normalized in 2 days (creatinine 0.69 mg/dl, GFR 71.3 ml/min/1.73 m2). Severe chylous ascites appeared
on the ninth postoperative day with about 400 ml/day of chyle drained by the peritoneal dialysis catheter. Isotopic lymphography (Tc-99 m)
and ultrasound confirmed a lymphatic leakage in her right iliac region and a lymphocele around the graft (65 × 48 × 92 mm) without vascular
or ureteral compression. A conservative treatment was started using albumin and a non-fat diet, with stabilization of the chylous ascites
after 8 weeks. Her blood pressure stayed high after the graft and was stabilized with amlodipine and enalapril. Our patient was then
discharged with a stable clinical condition and good graft function (creatinine 0.39 mg/dl, GFR 126.2 ml/min/1.73 m2). Three months after
the transplantation, a polymerase chain reaction demonstrated a Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) count of over 200 000 copies/ml and her lymphocyte
count had dropped to 240 cells/μL. To restore our patient’s immune response to EBV, the immunosuppressive regimen was decreased to
methylprednisolone 2 mg/day and tacrolimus 1 mg twice a day (target blood concentration, 5 ng/ml), and azathioprine was stopped. Four months
after the transplantation, our patient developed chronic diarrhea. Blood tests showed severe hypoalbuminemia (1.9 g/dl). She was
hospitalized because of the deterioration in her general condition, dyspnea and fever. A chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusion,
which was drained. Her blood pressure was high and her anti-hypertensive treatment was therefore increased. Scintigraphy with transferrin
In-111 revealed signs of exudative enteropathy. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed. A biopsy of her gastric mucosa confirmed
a diagnosis of post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (monomorphic diffused large-B-cells lymphoma). Because our patient was not
considered able to tolerate the COPADM standard chemotherapy protocol (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, prednisone, methotrexate)
and because of lymphocyte CD20 expression, treatment with three doses of anti-CD20 antibodies (rituximab) was chosen. Meanwhile, because of
the persistence of her ascites and hypoalbuminemia, lymphatic MRI was done in another center. It showed a 70 × 55 × 78 mm lymphocele on the
internal side of the graft, multiple thrombosis of the venous system with development of a collateral circulation, dilatation of her
lymphatic system without visualization of a leak, and increased thickness of her intestinal wall. A gastric biopsy was done after the
rituximab regimen and showed no residual sign of malignancy. She improved with parenteral nutrition and albumin supplementation, and was
discharged home 6 months after transplantation. At almost 5 years of follow-up (age 8), our patient is in good clinical condition (weight
25.6 kg, height 117 cm) and back at school. Her blood pressure is normal (106/64 mmHg) with atenolol, amlodipine and enalapril. An abdominal
color Doppler ultrasound showed a normal aspect of the graft, with lymphocele and ascites resolution. Her creatinine level was 0.40 mg/dl
with a calculated GFR of 139.7 ml/min/1.73 m2. Fraxiparine continues at a dosage of 60 UI/kg/day. Some studies have tried to assess the
natural evolution of FMD, showing worsening stenosis in 33 % but no cases of complete arterial obstruction. However, methodological problems
have been found in those studies, with a risk of progression that may have been overestimated [4, 5]. When affecting a lot of vessels, FMD
can be rapidly progressive, particularly in young children . Renal autotransplantation is an accepted surgical treatment for FMD with
involvement of renal vessels, providing good long-term results with a return to normal blood pressure [3, 7, 8]. Retrospectively, the
surgical decision to repair the right renal artery in our patient may be discussed because it made the KT more difficult, but at that time,
the main objective was to save the right kidney. When faced with a case of diffuse vascular disease, a vascular preservation strategy is
paramount. Moreover, renal artery reconstruction using an autologous graft is known to have better results than when using a prosthetic,
because of a major risk of thrombosis in a prosthetic graft because they do not grow with the child [9, 10]. It was for this reason that the
vascular surgeon in our case chose a graft with a larger diameter than that of the vessel diameter. Indeed, Barral et al. state the need to
wait to the end of growth before repairing vessels if possible. If not, an allograft is better than a prosthesis . These authors advise that
the external anastomosis of the graft be reinforced and for the graft to be over-long to compensate for the growth of the child. However,
few reports concerning the use of vascular prosthesis in children have been published so it was difficult to predict the evolution of our
patient based on the literature. Also, the transplantation was done on a vessel previously repaired with a prosthesis. We found no relevant
publications on that subject for pediatric cases but there are reports citing good results from KTs simultaneously performed with vascular
repair in severe cases of adult arteriosclerosis [11, 12]. Diffuse venous thrombosis and FMD constitute a rare indication for KT . Our
choice to proceed with transplantation despite a complicated and mostly thrombosed venous network was greatly motivated by the normal
psychomotor development of the child. Our patient lost both kidneys because both renal arteries were affected by the FMD and she developed
an aneurysm on the common iliac artery, which is unusual in FMD . The graft artery was anastomosed on the common iliac artery below the
reconstructed vascular segment. We decided to do so because of the normal macroscopic aspect of the vessel and a normal frozen section. Two
years after transplantation, the graft and iliac vessels were normal on a color Doppler ultrasound. Fraxiparine prophylaxis was administered
after transplantation to prevent venous thrombosis of the graft. Our patient presented other risk factors for KT, such as weight under 15 kg
and pretransplantation use of hemodialysis. Young children tend to have more delayed graft function and graft thrombosis but less rejection
[15, 16]. The graft function in our patient restored without delay and neither graft thrombosis nor rejection was seen. There is only one
other reported case of successful KT in a patient with FMD in the medical literature, which showed good kidney function after 8 years of
follow-up and blood pressure normalized with only enalapril . However, that transplantation was performed in a 6-year-old patient, without a
history of infantile myofibromatosis, chemotherapy or peritoneal dialysis and without anastomosis on a repaired vessel. Also, bilateral
nephrectomy was performed before KT to control hypertension. Nevertheless, the good results of that case support us in our choice for KT in
our patient. We present the complex case of a 3-year-old girl with IM and FMD. Those conditions led to arterial hypertension, superior vena
cava syndrome, renal and iliac aneurysms, and finally renal failure. A KT was performed with a deceased adult donor kidney graft on a
repaired iliac artery bearing a prosthesis and with a thrombosed inferior vena cava. The short-term complications and their treatments are
discussed. After 5 years of follow-up, our patient has a normal renal function. We consider KT to be a therapeutic option in patients with
renal failure caused by these rare vascular diseases. Long-term use of efficient anti-coagulant therapy is required. Written informed
consent was obtained from the parents of the child for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Epstein–Barr virus fibromuscular dysplasia glomerular filtration
rate infantile myofibromatosis kidney transplantation magnetic resonance imaging polymerase chain reaction Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interest. Authors’ contributions FJ was responsible for data collection, analysis and interpretation,
and drafting the manuscript. FF performed the surgery, and drafted and critically revised the manuscript. RR critically revised the
manuscript. GN performed the follow-up of the child and critically revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
