Patients with primary multiple malignancies are progressively increasing due to prolonged survival of cancer patients and to the advances in
diagnostic techniques and therapeutic options. Here we present a 66 year-old caucasian patient with four synchronous primary malignant
tumors affecting the lung, oropharynx, large bowel and prostate gland, respectively, treated with multidisciplinary approach. The increased
incidence of multiple malignant tumors is a real challenge to the clinician and clinical attention should be made to avoid a misdiagnosis.
In addition an early diagnosis is essential to achieve a radical treatment. We believe that the treatment modality should be carefully made
and tailored on the individual patient suffering from this disease. Patients with multiple primary malignancies (MPMs) are progressively
increasing; these tumors may be metachronous or synchronous. This distinction implies important diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. From
a diagnostic point of view the different patterns of MPMs should be considered. Therapeutically, a multi-disciplinary and patient-oriented
approach should be considered. Hereby, we present a case of four primary malignant synchronous tumors affecting the lung, oropharynx, large
bowel and prostate gland, respectively. A 66-year-old male was referred to our department because of cough, chest pain and weight loss. His
past clinical history, family history were unremarkable. Given the persistency of symptoms, chest X-ray was performed and showed a subtle
opacity at the upper segment of the right lower lung. Whole body computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of a pulmonary
malignant-looking nodule without hilar lymphadenopathy. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed avid uptake
of the pulmonary nodule as well as oropharyngeal, sigmoid colon, and prostate gland uptake (Fig. 1). Subsequently, the patient underwent
video-assisted bronchoscopy, which revealed normal findings. Conversely, video-assisted laryngoscopy showed an infiltrative ulcerated lesion
involving the base and both valves of the tongue. Oropharyngeal biopsy was performed and histology revealed an infiltrative squamous cell
carcinoma. Subsequently, CT guided lung biopsy showed a lung adenocarcinoma. The patient underwent colonoscopy with polypectomy and
histology revealed the presence of adenocarcinoma. Finally, specimen from the prostate gland revealed an adenocarcinoma (Gleason score:
3 + 3), too (Table 1). Abnormally enlarged lymph nodes in the abdomen up to 1.7 cm in diameter along with several non-specific lymph nodes
have been identified. CT scan of the neck and facial bones showed a bulky mass in the right aspect of the oral cavity, infiltrating the base
of the tongue with preservation of the adjacent mandibular cortical bone abutting the midline, given a horseshoe-like appearance of the
tumor. There was infiltration of the muscles of the tongue base whereas the left mylohyoid muscle was preserved. Bilateral enlarged lymph
nodes at level II and III have been identified. Given the presence of these multiple malignant tumors, multidisciplinary assessment was
necessary. The laryngeal lesion was treated by radio and chemotherapy whereas the sigmoid and prostate tumors were treated by surgical
excision. In regard to the pulmonary tumor, the decision about whether surgery or radiotherapy would be more appropriate was considered
later. Consequently, chemotherapy and radiotherapy were started given almost complete resolution of the lung tumor; instead we observed
progression of the sigmoid tumor along with two enlarged lymph nodes in the pelvis, whereas the tumor of the prostate gland did not change
in size. The patient had left hemicolectomy and prostatectomy, which confirmed the presence of adenocarcinoma with features of vascular
invasion, adipose tissue invasion, and no extramural or perineural involvement. Metastases were found in 10 out of 19 lymph nodes. As a
result, the histological staging was pT3 N2B R0 B. Prostatic specimen confirmed the presence of adenocarcinoma with no infiltration of the
urinary bladder. However, multifocal extension by the tumor to the adjacent tissues was observed. A 30-day interval follow-up PET-CT scan
showed an avid focal uptake at segment 5 of the liver suspicious of a sigmoid adenocarcinoma metastasis and at the apical segment of the
right lower lobe in accordance with the known pulmonary tumor. A further multidisciplinary assessment regarding the appropriate patient’s
management suggests surgical treatment for the pulmonary lesion, stereotactic radiotherapy for the metastatic deposit in the liver and
adjuvant chemotherapy for the sigmoid tumor of colon. Surgical specimen after right lower lobectomy showed a G3 type lung carcinoma with
prevalent aspects of acinar growth and absence of pleural infiltration, vascular invasion, or necrosis. The tumor did not involve the
bronchial or vascular surgical resection margins or adjacent lymph nodes. Immunocytochemistry was TTF1 (+) and CDX2 (−), whereas
histopathological staging was pT1 N0. The patient received stereotactic radiotherapy for the liver metastasis and adjuvant chemotherapy for
the sigmoid colonic tumor. An 18-month interval follow-up PET-CT scan demonstrated no recurrence.Fig. 1 Top left panel Axial non-contrast CT
scan shows no significant mediastinal, hilar and axillary lymphadenopathy. Bottom left panel Axial non-contrast lung window setting CT shows
a solid nodule at the upper segment of right lower lobe. Right panel Coronal view whole-body PET scan shows focal uptake of at the upper
segment of right lower lobe, sigmoid colon and prostate glandTable 1Clinical history of the patient: diagnosis and treatmentDate
(mm/dd/yrs)ExaminationHistologyDate (mm/dd/yrs)Treatment02/08/2013Laringoscopy biopsyVegetating lesion base of the tongue Infiltrating and
ulcerating squamous cell carcinoma C2–C3 From 03/12/2013 to 04/13/20132 cycles of TPF (taxotere/cisplatin/5-fluoruracil) plus rasdiation
therapy on nodes PET + and loco regional (69.96 Gy) and on orofarinx (54.45 Gy)02/08/2013CT-guided pulmonary biopsySubpleural lesion o f the
right upper lobe Pulmonary Adenocarcinoma TTF1(+) e CDX2(-). pT1a N0 09/30/2013Right lower lobectomyNo
chemotherapy02/13/2013PancolonscopyPolipectomyAdenocarcinoma CDX2(+); TTF1(−). pT3a N2b R0 07/11/2013Left hemicolectomyAdjuvant
chemotherapy03/07/2013Prostatic biopsyAdenocarcinoma Grading Gleason score 4 + 3; pT3, N2b, R0B 07/11/2013ProstatectomyNo chemotherapy Top
left panel Axial non-contrast CT scan shows no significant mediastinal, hilar and axillary lymphadenopathy. Bottom left panel Axial non-
contrast lung window setting CT shows a solid nodule at the upper segment of right lower lobe. Right panel Coronal view whole-body PET scan
shows focal uptake of at the upper segment of right lower lobe, sigmoid colon and prostate gland Clinical history of the patient: diagnosis
and treatment Since the first report of Billroth and the definition of Warren and Gates , the incidence of multiple cancers had
progressively increased over time. The first point that deserves clarification regarding multiple tumors is what does the term ‘‘primary’’
means. First, tumors must be histologically different. Second, they must involve different organs. Finally, metastatic lesions among these
tumors must be excluded. MPMs are generally divided into 2 categories: metachronous, when tumors follow one another regardless a fixed
period of time and synchronous, when tumors arise simultaneously or within 6 months from the primary malignant tumor . Metachronous are more
frequent than synchronous tumors with a ratio of 2.7: 1. Second primary tumors are most common, whereas third and fourth primary tumors are
relatively rare . There are several explanations for the origin of these tumors. One is the growing incidence of multiple tumors due to
increased lifetime . Another is that effective anti-neoplastic therapy has led to a significant improvement in patients’ survival from
cancer. Therefore, survivors have a 20 % higher risk of new primary cancer in the same or different organs than the general population . The
tendency of some subjects to develop multiple tumors (synchronous or metachronous) may be explained either by an individual predisposition
or by the action of carcinogenic factors acting on different organs at different times. This is probable the explanation regarding the
association between low growing and aggressive tumors, as reported in our case. The pathogenesis of multiple and single tumors has similar
mechanisms. The combined action of environment and genetic factors facilitates the onset of a new tumor. Therefore, multifactorial and
predisposing factors are likely responsible for the development of metachronous tumors . Conversely, it is difficult to explain the origin
of synchronous tumors, even if multifactorial and predisposing factor cannot be exclude, their onset seems to be more time depending. Even
if there are several limitations in the current literature because most are case-report studies, the reported incidence of metachronous and
synchronous tumors is relatively high . Therefore, radiologists and clinicians should be aware about different patterns and clinical
presentation of multiple malignant tumors. In conclusion, successful patient’s management and increased life expectancy can be achieved by
multidisciplinary management and patient-oriented approach in multiple primary malignant synchronous tumors. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. multiple primary malignancies computed tomography
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography positron emission tomography-computed tomography thyroid transcription factor-1 caudal
type homeobox transcription factor-2 AT, UC, MdS, FB, AV, AAL, MMC, MA have made substantial contributions to conception and design, or
acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data, have been involved in drafting the manuscript or revising it critically for
important intellectual content and have given final approval of the version to be published. We state that there has been no duplicate
publication or submission elsewhere, all authors have read and approved the manuscript, subject to acceptance, authors will transfer
copyright to the Publisher, and there is no ethical problem or conflict of interest. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We
thank Dr. Gerardo Cioffi, native speaker, for reviewing the English language. The authors have not received funding for this case report.
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
