To open vaginal cavity to the pelvic floor is part of surgical treatment for urogenital sinus (UGS) in girls with congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (CAH). For high UGS, this operative procedure can be challenging and may jeopardise urinary continence. Combined perineal and
laparoscopic approaches could be useful to minimise perineal dissection and to facilitate the vaginal lowering. We report the procedure of a
laparoscopic-assisted vaginal pull-through for supra-sphincteric UGS in a 5-year-old girl with CAH. Laparoscopic dissection of the vagina
from the posterior wall of the bladder and urethra, division of the confluence and vaginal pull-through to the perineum are described. The
technique is derived from laparoscopic-assisted treatment for high ano-rectal malformations. Compared with current procedures for treatment
for high UGS, laparoscopic-assisted approach allows mobilising vagina with minimal dissection of perineum and complete preservation of
urethra. Another major advantage is to provide a direct vision for dissection of the space between rectum and urethra prior to vaginal pull-
through. Laparoscopic-assisted vaginal pull-through appears to be an interesting approach for high UGS in CAH patients, reducing dissection
and risk of urinary incontinence. This new approach needs to be strengthened by other cases. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a rare
disease, which induce high levels of androgens, consecutive to an enzymatic deficiency in the biosynthetic pathway from cholesterol to the
different corticosteroids. In female foetuses, this results in varying degrees of virilisation of external genitalia and incomplete
separation of urethra and vagina with confluence of both structures in a common channel called urogenital sinus (UGS). The severity of
virilisation was described by Prader. It is known that these two characteristics are not always linked, meaning that a low degree of
external virilisation may cohabit with high UGS, and vice versa. Interestingly, this is also not linked to the severity of the enzymatic
activity deficiency. Rarely, confluence may be very high, supra-sphincteric, with a vaginal confluence having a veru montanum-like
appearance. Corrective surgery in CAH girls is a controversial issue in paediatric urology, especially regarding clitoral reduction. In this
report, we will focus on vaginoplasty that is less debated. The guiding principles of this surgery were proposed by Hendren and Crawford in
their description of the vaginal pull-through procedure. This manoeuvre can be quite straightforward in patients with a low UGS, the
confluence being almost at perineum. For supra-sphincteric confluence, the procedure may appear challenging, potentially leading to severe
complications especially regarding urinary continence. The Hendren's principles are still followed, but numerous modifications have been
proposed. Some of those modifications use an extensive dissection of the perineum, hence also a better mobilisation of the vagina, such as
the total urogenital mobilisation (TUM). Different approaches have also been proposed, for example, transtrigonal approach. More recently,
anterior sagittal transrectal approach (ASTRA) has been described. Nevertheless, these techniques remain complex, with limited exposure and
extensive perineal dissection. Keeping in mind Georgeson's description of laparoscopic transsection of recto-urethral fistulae for ano-
rectal malformations, we postulated that laparoscopic approach of high UGS and separation of the vagina from the urethra could be possible.
We were backed up by the experience of Fuchs et al. reporting laparoscopic approach for a non-hormonal UGS, not linked to CAH. We report the
laparoscopic approach of a high UGS in a CAH girl, done at the same time as feminising genitoplasty. A 3 -year-old girl with genital
ambiguity was referred to our institution without previous medical assessment. She presented a severe virilisation, Prader V stage, with the
clitoral organ measuring 5 cm in length and 2.5 cm broad, a sub-coronal urethral meatus, and complete fusion of the genital fold with
scrotal aspect [Figure 1]. At birth, she was declared male. Familial history revealed a boy deceased soon after birth, 2 years before the
birth of our patient. Initial work-up revealed a 46, XX caryotype. Genetic analysis shows compound heterozygote for two severe mutations of
CYP21 gene. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis revealed normal female internal organs and showed high UGS. Voiding
cystourethrography showed the confluence of the vagina and urethra about 15 mm below the bladder neck. Due to the severity of the case, we
decided to make a diagnostic cystoscopy, which revealed a male-like urethra with confluence between urethra and vagina 15 mm below the
bladder neck, having an aspect of veru montanum. Vaginoscopy reveals a normal-appearing vagina of 5 cm depth. Cervix uterus was normal
looking. For 2 years, the child and her parents were regularly seen in a multidisciplinary team, including endocrinologist, geneticists,
psychologist and paediatric surgeons. During this follow-up period, parents had a good understanding of the situation of their child, and
common decision was made to change the sex of rearing. Masculinised external genitalia Surgery began with a new urethro-cystoscopy. A 2 Fr
Fogarty catheter was placed into the vagina and a 10 Fr Foley catheter in the bladder. We then continued with a standard laparoscopic
approach. Revision of the pelvis showed two normal ovaries and annexes and a normal uterus. The patient was positioned in Tredelenburg, and
procedure was begun with opening of the peritoneal fold just in front of uterus wall. Dissection was conducted in this almost avascular
plan. The two ureters were visualised but not dissected. The Fogarty balloon was used to localise the proximal part of the vagina. The
anterior vaginal wall was dissected by blunt dissection up to the urethro-vaginal confluence, which was divided [Figure 2] after complete
dissection of the vaginal end with a McGill clamp. The defect on the urethra was not sutured. Lateral aspects of the vagina were freed from
surrounding tissues. Vascularisation of the distal part of the vagina was clearly maintained. Genitoplasty was pursued with a median opening
of the labial fold fusion and UGS up to its bend towards bladder. A Fortunoff's flap was achieved. A space was created between the rectum
and urethra up to the abdominal cavity, using a Kelly clamp. Laparoscopic control allowed to secure the direction of this dissection. The
opening was then progressively enlarged with Hegar dilatators, till size 17 [Figure 3]. We then introduced a 10 mm unarmed trocar, through
which the distal part of the vagina was seized with a non-traumatic clamp. Taking care not to twist it, the vagina was then pulled downwards
without tension to its definitive position and fixed to the Fortunoff's flap posteriorly and to the urethra anteriorly. Feminising
genitoplasty was completed, with clitoral neuro-vascular bundle preservation [Figure 4]. Bleeding was minimised using bupivacaini
hydrochloridum anhydricum 0.25% Adrenalin (Adrenalin 1:200,000) (AstraZenecaÂ®) in local injection. Following procedure, a perineal hematoma
results in partial dehiscence of the Fortunoff's flap. This could necessitate local revision later on. Urinary catheter was left in place
for 10 days, and cystography at this time showed a well-healed urethra, with no urine leaks. Two months later, a clinical work-up with a
cystovaginoscopy was organised. The child was doing well, had no pain or urine leaks. Cystoscopy showed a normal looking urethra, without
stenosis, measuring 32 mm from the bladder neck to the vulva. The gain of the urethral length between the previous confluence and the actual
position was 17 mm. Vaginoscopy demonstrated a well-vascularised, normal looking vagina, including the distal part, measuring 60 mm from
cervix to vulva. The glans clitoris was well vascularised. Division of vaginal fistula Hegar dilatation Final aspect of genitoplasty
Bringing the vagina to the perineum in patients presenting with a high UGS is the most delicate part of the procedure and can lead to per-
or post-operative complications. Hendren and Crawford first described the vaginal pull-through in 1969, using a perineal approach in seven
such patients, allowing a significant step forward in the options provided for these patients. Despite this progress, there remained
concerns regarding continence following this procedure. In 2005, a study showed that two-thirds of adult women who underwent genital
feminisation surgery in infancy presented with lower urinary tract symptoms. These results and the difficult exposure during this surgery
have led to technical modifications such as TUM and more recently ASTRA. A recent review has shown satisfactory results in regards to
continence with these modified techniques. Unfortunately, these studies only included children, and the mean follow-up was shorter than 4
years. As long-term results are lacking, we favour any technical improvement reducing the perineal dissection and thus preserving the
surrounding structures. As proposed by Rink et al., we believe that the decision making in regards to vaginoplasty should rely on the
distance from the confluence to the bladder neck rather than the length of UGS. The short urethra measured between the confluence and the
bladder neck (15 mm) in our case meant that an exclusively perineal approach did not seem appropriate. The laparoscopic-assisted posterior
sagittal anorectoplasty to treat high anorectal malformations was first described by Georgeson et al. in 2000 is well codified and the
results are known. Taking into account this acquired experience and the report of the team of Netherland in a different condition, the
technique appeared suitable for high UGS in CAH patients to mobilise the vagina without extensive perineal dissection and tension. Moreover,
it allows for the creation of a normal length urethra using the distal part of the UGS as a substitute of urethra down to the perineum. Last
but not least, the laparoscopic approach offers a safer dissection when creating the space between urethra and rectum which is done under
visual control. Laparoscopic-assisted vaginal pull-through appears to be useful in order to minimise perineal dissection and to facilitate
vaginal lowering in CAH patients with high UGS. Even as a preliminary report, the technique appears to be considered when surgical
correction of this very rare condition is intended. Only long-term follow-up and reports from other surgical teams will allow to validate
this approach. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. We are grateful to Dr. O. Sanchez Salisbury for help in manuscript preparation.
