Oral malignant melanoma (OMM) is an aggressive tumor with very low survival rate and easy to metastasize. Pleural metastatic melanoma via
primary OMM is rare. In this report, we presented a case of metastatic malignant melanoma of the pleura originated from OMM. A 54-year-old
man without primary skin lesion was diagnosed multiple nodular shadows, pleural invasion, and pleural effusion by chest computed tomography
(CT). One cyst-form tumor on the tongue base was observed by bronchoscopy, which was diagnosed as OMM by pathological examination and then
was resected. After getting the tumor tissues from the pleura by pleural biopsy surgery, the diagnosis of pathological examination was
pleural metastatic melanoma. Furthermore, tumor cells displayed a positive immunoreaction for melanocytic markers S100 and HMB-45 combining
with positive vimentin and cytokeratin AE1/AE3. The patient was therefore diagnosed with metastatic melanoma of the left pleura and the
primary melanoma was OMM. According to this case, we could draw the conclusion that pleural metastasis from OMM was very rare and
thoracoscopy preceded under local anesthesia is an important method for its accurate diagnosis. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12957-015-0741-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Melanomas, including two subtypes,
are originated from melanoblasts or melanocytes which can have a benign or malignant clinical course. They mainly occur on the skin and are
relevant to ultraviolet light exposure as common tumors in human . The incidence of melanoma is increasing about 5 % per year worldwide .
Malignant melanoma (MM) is the most aggressive skin cancer originating from melanocytes with a high degree of phenotypic plasticity, which
is primarily located in the skin but also found in eyes, ears, mouth, gastrointestinal tract, genital mucosa, and leptomeninges . Although
melanoma accounts for only 5 % of all malignant skin tumors, it has occupied 75 % deaths of all skin tumor patients . Surgery can be
performed as an effective treatment at the early phase of the tumor. Unfortunately, melanoma is prone to metastasis by lymphatic pathway to
regional lymph nodes and even by circulation to distant sites, which can significantly worsen the prognosis [5, 6]. The median survival time
for metastatic melanoma patients is only about 6–9 months [7, 8]. Primary melanoma of the thorax, which mainly involves the lung and pleura,
is exceptionally rare. In this report, we presented a case that was diagnosed as metastatic MM of the pleura by pleural biopsy surgery,
which was originated from an oral malignant melanoma (OMM). The initial symptoms of this patient were chest pain and dyspnea for 2 months.
Chest computed tomography (CT) which was performed on a 64-row multidetector CT scanner (Somatom Sensation, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany)
showed multiple nodular shadows, pleural invasion, and pleural effusion, and at first, the case was misdiagnosed as lung and pleural
metastatic carcinoma. Therefore, thoracoscopy, including video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) and simple rigid thoracoscopy, is the
key to the accurate diagnosis of this disease. The patient was a 54-year-old Han Chinese man who, in June 2013, was diagnosed as double-
sided pleural effusion which was combined with the left multifocal pleural lesions and multiple lung metastases in the right lung by CT scan
(Fig. 1a, b). The previous medical history reported no primary skin lesion including melanin stain. The related examines were finished
before thoracoscopy pleural biopsy operation. One cyst of the neoplasm on the left side of the tongue base and multiple bronchial stenosis
of left pulmonary segments were observed by narrow band imaging (NBI) bronchoscopy (Olympus, EVIS LUCERA) (Fig. 2). The tumor was then
resected and diagnosed as OMM by pathological examination (Fig. 3a) and the immunohistochemical staining results (Additional file 1: Figure
S1). The results of tuberculosis antibody (TB-Ab) and TB-DNA in serum were all negative. Serum tumor markers for lung carcinoma including
carcino-embryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 72-4, squamous cell carcinoma, cyfra 21-1, cytokeratin 19 fragments, and ferritin were all
in normal range. However, carbohydrate antigen 125 and neuron-specific enolase were about three times and two times higher than the upper
limits, respectively.Fig. 1The chest CT imaging of the pleural effusion and lesions. Before operation, pleural effusion and lesions in the
left thorax and multiple metastases in the right lung can be seen in CT scan imaging (a and b). After complete drainage of pleural effusion,
metastatic neoplasms in pleura, enlargement of mediastinal lymph nodes, and lung metastases were clearly emerged by countercheck CT scan (c
and d). The pleural lesions were pointed by blue arrows in d. a and c Lung window. b and d Mediastinum windowFig. 2NBI bronchoscopy. One
cystoma was on the left side of the tongue base (a). The cystoma was observed by bronchoscopy and pointed by black arrows. Abnormalities
were not seen in the glottis and tracheal juga (b and c). Bronchial stenosis of left pulmonary segments can be seen in d Fig. 3The
pathological results of the resected tumor from the tongue base and pleural tumor tissue and immunohistochemical detection of the pleural
tumor tissue. The tissue’s histopathology changes were observed in light microscope (Nikon Eclipse 80i, Tokyo, Japan) and photos were taken.
Postoperative pathological results for the tongue base and pleural tumor tissue, respectively (a and b) (×200). The immunohistochemical
results of the pleural tumor tissue are shown in c–f, which are S100, HMB-45, vimentin, and cytokeratin AE1/AE3, respectively, and the
magnification are all of ×100 The chest CT imaging of the pleural effusion and lesions. Before operation, pleural effusion and lesions in
the left thorax and multiple metastases in the right lung can be seen in CT scan imaging (a and b). After complete drainage of pleural
effusion, metastatic neoplasms in pleura, enlargement of mediastinal lymph nodes, and lung metastases were clearly emerged by countercheck
CT scan (c and d). The pleural lesions were pointed by blue arrows in d. a and c Lung window. b and d Mediastinum window NBI bronchoscopy.
One cystoma was on the left side of the tongue base (a). The cystoma was observed by bronchoscopy and pointed by black arrows. Abnormalities
were not seen in the glottis and tracheal juga (b and c). Bronchial stenosis of left pulmonary segments can be seen in d The pathological
results of the resected tumor from the tongue base and pleural tumor tissue and immunohistochemical detection of the pleural tumor tissue.
The tissue’s histopathology changes were observed in light microscope (Nikon Eclipse 80i, Tokyo, Japan) and photos were taken. Postoperative
pathological results for the tongue base and pleural tumor tissue, respectively (a and b) (×200). The immunohistochemical results of the
pleural tumor tissue are shown in c–f, which are S100, HMB-45, vimentin, and cytokeratin AE1/AE3, respectively, and the magnification are
all of ×100 Subsequently, the pleural biopsy surgery of the left thorax was preceded by semi-rigid thoracoscopy (model LTF-240, Olympus,
Tokyo, Japan) (Fig. 4) with video assistance under local anesthesia using 10 mL 1 % Lidocaine injected into the subcutaneous tissue. The
thoracoscopy was entered from a single port in the sixth intercostal space. After extraction of 1500 mL bloody pleural fluid, multiple
violet black neoplasms can be seen in the parietal pleura, which were different sizes, very brittle, and prone to bleeding (Fig. 5). After
biting from several sections of these lesions, the tissues were used for pathological detection. Pleural effusion was continuously
discharged by using closed drainage tube. Cytology examination of pleural effusion displayed red blood cells in the field of vision and
severe abnormity of cell nucleus.Fig. 4The semi-rigid thoracoscopy was used in pleural biopsy surgeryFig. 5The main observation of pleural
biopsy surgery in the right parietal pleura. Multiple violet-black neoplasms can be seen in the parietal pleura by thoracoscopy with video
assistance, being different sizes, very brittle, and prone to bleeding, and these lesions are pointed by white arrows (a–c). d The tumor
tissues were gained by biopsy forceps. The used forceps is pointed by blue arrow The semi-rigid thoracoscopy was used in pleural biopsy
surgery The main observation of pleural biopsy surgery in the right parietal pleura. Multiple violet-black neoplasms can be seen in the
parietal pleura by thoracoscopy with video assistance, being different sizes, very brittle, and prone to bleeding, and these lesions are
pointed by white arrows (a–c). d The tumor tissues were gained by biopsy forceps. The used forceps is pointed by blue arrow Postoperative
pathological reports showed that these neoplasms were pleural metastatic melanoma by hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining, and combined
immunohistochemical results suggested that the HMB-45, S-100, vimentin, and AE1/AE3 (antibodies were all purchased from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA)) were all significantly positive expressions (Fig. 3b–f). After almost complete drainage of pleural effusion,
remarkable multiple metastatic neoplasms in the pleura, enlargement of mediastinal lymph nodes, and several lung metastases could be clearly
observed by countercheck CT scan (Fig. 1c, d). During the inpatient period, detections of brain CT scan, abdominal Doppler ultrasound, and
so on, there were no evidence to confirm other organs and any other lymphatic node metastases. Subsequently, there was no further treatment,
and less than 6 months of follow-up, the patient died. This case report and related experimental protocols were approved by the ethics
committee of Tianjin Union Medicine Centre of China. In the past several decades, the incidence of melanoma has been steadily rising with an
annual increase of 3–8 % worldwide . The most common form of melanoma is the cutaneous or the ocular form. As neural crest-derived cells,
melanocytes could migrate to the skin, mucous membranes, and other sites. Melanoma metastasizing to thorax is common, but primary pulmonary
or pleural melanoma is extremely rare. Therefore, MM has very seldom been described as a primary tumor in the pleura or lower respiratory
tract, and there are only very limited literatures that have been reported . Since metastasis of MM to the lung or pleura is relatively
common, it is very important to distinguish primary from secondary melanomas. OMM, which was first described by Weber in 1859, is a much
rare neoplasm located at the basal layer of the oral mucous membranes owing to the uncontrolled growth of melanocytes . Mucosal melanoma
accounts for only 0.5 % of all oral tumor involving the sinonasal cavity, oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, and upper esophagus . Oral melanomas
occur slightly more often in males (2.8:1, male to female ratio) and with an average age of 56 years (the age range is from 20 to 83 years)
. OMM belongs to head and neck mucosal melanomas (HNMM) and frequently exhibits postoperative recurrence and distant metastasis. For HNMM
patients, surgery is recommended if indicated, and surgery combined with postoperative radiotherapy is also recommended for dramatically
improved local control of the tumor bed. Radiotherapy and immunological therapy could be potential options for patients without surgery
chance . In the present case, the primary site of melanoma was previously found in the root of the tongue without primary skin lesion. After
obtaining the tumor tissues from several sites of parietal pleura by pleural biopsy surgery, the diagnosis of pathological examination was
pleural metastatic melanoma through HE staining method. Furthermore, tumor cells displayed a positive immunoreaction for melanocytic markers
(S100 and HMB-45, which are frequently expressed in primary oral melanomas and helpful to confirm the diagnosis ). In addition, both
vimentin and cytokeratin AE1/AE3 also appeared as positive expressions. We therefore ascertained that the metastatic melanoma of the left
pleura was metastasized from OMM. Modern thoracoscopy provides a potentially less invasive means to diagnose and to treat a variety of
intrathoracic diseases. Simple rigid thoracoscopy or VATS is safe and effective for the diagnosis of both benign and malignant pleural
disease which has very high sensitivity (80 to 100 %) . For the present patient, the color and the appearance of the melanoma are easy to
recognize under thoracoscopy, with the potential to limit complications and to reduce morbidity and hospital stays for thoracotomy. Pleural
tumorous diseases are one important indication for thoracoscopy with video assistance and can easily be diagnosed accurately. We have
presented a very rare case of amelanotic melanoma of the left parietal pleura that was diagnosed as a metastatic tumor from OMM by detailed
physical examination and pathological and immunohistochemistry detection. Pleural metastasis via OMM was very rare, and thoracoscopy
preceded under local anesthesia is an effective and safety method for its accurate diagnosis. The patient and his family members were
informed and have consented for the publication of this report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief
of this journal. Additional file 1: Figure S1. The immunohistochemical results of the primary tongue melanoma tissue are shown in (a), (b),
(c) and (d), which are S100, HMB-45, vimentin, and cytokeratin AE1/AE3, respectively, and the magnification are all of ×200 (JPG 2042 kb)
The immunohistochemical results of the primary tongue melanoma tissue are shown in (a), (b), (c) and (d), which are S100, HMB-45, vimentin,
and cytokeratin AE1/AE3, respectively, and the magnification are all of ×200 (JPG 2042 kb) computed tomography hematoxylin-eosin head and
neck mucosal melanoma malignant melanoma narrow band imaging oral malignant melanoma tuberculosis antibody video-assisted thoracoscopic
surgery Bingjun Yang, Qingzhao Li, Hui Zhao and Huibin Liu contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions C.Y. J., H.B.L., and B.J.Y. conceived and designed the experiments and drafted the
manuscript. B.J.Y., H.Z., and C.Y. J. performed the narrow band imaging (NBI) bronchoscopy detection, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery
(VATS) and simple rigid thoracoscopy operations. Y.G. and T.T. performed postoperative pathological detections and immunohistochemical
results including HMB-45, S-100, vimentin, and AE1/AE3. C.Y.J. prepared all figures. H.B.L., C.Y.J., and B.J.Y. wrote the paper. All authors
discussed the results, reviewed the manuscript, and approved the final manuscript.
