Supplemental Digital Content is available in the text Here we present the rupture of ectopic jejunal varices developing in a liver
transplant recipient without portal hypertension, which was successfully treated with percutaneous transhepatic coil embolization. A
48-year-old man with massive melena was admitted to our department. He had undergone liver transplantation for hepatitis B virus-related
liver cirrhosis 8 months before, and his postoperative course was satisfactory except for an acute cellular rejection. No evidence of
bleeding was detected by upper endoscopy or colonoscopy, but dynamic multidetector computed tomography of the whole abdomen revealed an
intestinal varix protruding into the lumen of the jejunum with suspected extravasation. There was no evidence of portal venous stenosis or
thrombosis. Immediately upon diagnosis of the ruptured ectopic jejunal varix, percutaneous transhepatic coil embolization was performed,
achieving complete hemostasis. The portal venous pressure measured during the procedure was within normal limits. He was discharged from the
hospital 11 days after embolization and remained in stable condition without re-bleeding 6 months after discharge. This is the first report
of an ectopic intestinal variceal rupture in an uneventful liver transplant recipient that was successfully treated with interventional
percutaneous transhepatic coil embolization. Clinicians encountering liver transplant recipients with melena should be aware of the
possibility of late-onset rupture of ectopic varices, even in those having an uneventful post-transplant course without portal hypertension.
Jejunal varices are uncommon manifestations of portal hypertension and are rarely symptomatic, even in patients with advanced cirrhosis or
severe portal hypertension.1,2 Bleeding from small bowel varices is reported in 5% of patients with esophageal varices and portal
hypertension.2 The portosystemic collaterals are thought to shrink or close after liver transplantation because portal hypertension can be
relieved by implantation of a normal graft,3 yet gastrointestinal bleeding from varices is not an uncommon presentation in recipients after
liver transplantation.4 It usually occurs, however, in recipients with complications such as graft dysfunction or portal venous
thrombosis/stenosis in the early post-transplant period.5 Even in such situations, ectopic/solitary jejunal variceal rupture in liver
transplant recipients is extremely rare. We herein report a case of ectopic jejunal variceal rupture occurring in an otherwise healthy
recipient 8 months after uneventful liver transplantation, which was successfully treated by interventional coil embolization. A 48-year-old
Japanese man with sudden onset melena was admitted to our department. He had undergone deceased-donor liver transplantation with a whole
liver graft for hepatitis B virus-related liver cirrhosis 8 months earlier. Before liver transplantation, he had severe portal hypertension
with esophageal varices, a spleno-renal shunt, and portal venous thrombus, and massive ascites. During liver transplantation, a thrombectomy
was completed, which resulted in an adequate hepatopetal portal flow, and collateral veins remained untouched. His postoperative course was
uneventful except for moderate acute cellular rejection on postoperative day 16, which was successfully treated with a steroid bolus and
mycophenolate mofetil, and he was discharged on postoperative day 42. Since then, he visited our outpatient clinic for routine post-
transplant management and anti-hepatitis B virus combined prophylaxis with entecavir and hepatitis B immunoglobulin. His immunosuppressive
regimen included cyclosporine (100 mg twice daily), methylprednisolone (2 mg daily), and mycophenolate mofetil (1500 mg daily). Upon
admission, the patient was slightly tachycardic (heart rate 112/min) with a low systolic blood pressure (78 mm Hg). Physical examination
revealed apparent anemia in the conjunctiva, palpation of the spleen 3 cm below the costal margin, and no hepatomegaly. Laboratory data
revealed a hemoglobin level of 5.3 g/dL with a slightly decreased platelet count (81 × 109/L), whereas the liver function tests and
coagulation panel were within normal limits. After appropriate resuscitation and blood transfusion, the patient underwent an upper endoscopy
and colonoscopy, which revealed no evidence of bleeding from gastroesophageal varices, gastroduodenal ulcers, or lesions in the large
intestine. At the same time, dynamic multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) of the whole abdomen was performed, which revealed an
intestinal varix protruding into the lumen of the jejunum with suspected extravasation (Figure 1A). The patency of the portal venous system
without thrombus or stenosis was confirmed. MDCT-angiography revealed that the varix was located at the distal end of the main trunk of the
superior mesenteric vein (Figure 1B), which led to our decision to perform immediate interventional treatment rather than double-balloon
small-bowel endoscopy or capsule endoscopy. The images of dynamic multidetector computed tomography on admission; the varices protruding
into jejunal lumen is pointed by white arrow heads. Based on the MDCT-angiography findings, the varix was judged to be accessible via a
transhepatic approach. Under local anesthesia, portal venous cannulation was performed through left-sided percutaneous transhepatic access
using a 21-gauge access needle and 0.018 inch wire, which was then converted to a 0.035-inch system with the placement of a 5Fr sheath.
Portal venous pressure was within normal limits (10 mm Hg). Under the guidance of MDCT-angiography, the 5Fr catheter was advanced to the
jejunal varix and portography was performed, which revealed rupture of the jejunal varix into the jejunal lumen (Figure 2A and supplemental
video, http://links.lww.com/MD/A534). The varix was embolized using 12 metallic coils (4 GDC detachable coils, 8 and 10 mm in diameter,
Boston Scientific Japan; 8 Tornado coils, 5–8 mm in diameter, Cook Japan) from the distal to the proximal side. After embolization, complete
hemostasis without extravasation was confirmed via completion portography (Figure 2B). Direct portographies demonstrating variceal rupture
(A) and after coil embolization (B); the intraluminal bleeding and coils were pointed by white and black arrow heads, respectively. The
patient was discharged from the hospital 11 days after the interventional treatment without any rebleeding episodes. Six months after
discharge, he remains in stable condition with no further bleeding. This study was approved by Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of
Medicine, the University of Tokyo Research Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board (2185). The individual informed consent paperwork was
recorded. In the preparation of this manuscript, all efforts have been made to protect patient privacy and anonymity. Gastroesophageal
variceal bleeding commonly presents in patients with portal hypertension, yet jejunal variceal bleeding is rare, even in those with
cirrhosis and portal hypertension.1 Jejunal variceal bleeding in an uneventful liver transplant recipient is even more uncommon, and, to the
best of our knowledge, this is the first report of an ectopic intestinal variceal rupture in such a patient that was successfully treated
with interventional coil embolization. Based on previously published studies,4–6 common features of gastrointestinal bleeding after liver
transplantation are as follows: it usually occurs within 1 month after transplantation; variceal rupture is often associated with graft
dysfunction such as portal venous thrombosis, severe cholestasis, and small-for-size syndrome; Roux-en-Y for hepaticojejunostomy is a
frequent site of bleeding; and ulcers and gastroenterocolitis are the major cause of bleeding. No such characteristics applied in the
present case. In liver transplant recipients with an uneventful postoperative course, existing varices usually improve or even disappear
with the decompression of portal hypertension.3 Indeed, based on a retrospective chronologic review of computed tomography images, the
collateral veins observed preoperatively had apparently improved after liver transplantation in this case, but the size of the ruptured
varix detected and identified in the pretransplant enhanced-computed tomography remained the same, whereas the intestinal edema had
significantly improved (Figure 3). In this particular patient, there was no portal venous thrombus or stenosis, portal venous pressure at
the time of interventional treatment was within normal limits, and the estimated volume of the spleen was 432 mL, which was a decrease from
721 mL at the time of liver transplantation, all of which indicated remission and the absence of portal hypertension after liver
transplantation. Therefore, although the reason for the rupture is difficult to speculate, we postulated that mechanical intraluminal injury
of the mucosa on the protruding varix caused the rupture. Prompt recognition of the bleeding site by MDCT allowed for immediate
interventional coil embolization. Computed tomography images of the jejunal varices taken at pretransplant, 3 months, 6 months, and
readmission. The endoscopic approach is an established treatment for esophageal variceal rupture,7 but there is no standard direct treatment
for ectopic intestinal varices. Traditionally, intestinal variceal bleeding is treated surgically.8,9 In some cases, an interventional and
indirect strategy, such as a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS)10 and balloon-occluded transverse obliteration to
decompress portal hypertension have been used to relieve the bleeding.11–13 The efficacy of an endoscopic approach seems minimal,2,14
although not entirely inadequate.15 Successful direct embolizations via a transhepatic approach such as in this case were recently reported
by several authors.16–19 Macedo et al20 reported 14 case series of percutaneous transhepatic embolization for ectopic varices in the
gastrointestinal tract, and concluded that the strategy is effective in the short term, but should be followed by a transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt for long-term control of rebleeding. In contrast to the present case, patients suffering from bleeding from
ectopic varices were commonly complicated with severe portal hypertension, which makes the surgical option difficult or life threatening.
Accordingly, the interventional approach, directly obliterating the bleeding varices via percutaneous transhepatic route20 or relieving the
high portal pressure via TIPS,10 is the first choice for the treatment, which could be done safely for any patient. Surgical intervention
may not be indicated for hemostasis, but may be spared for making shunt to decompress the portal hypertension in selected cases.21 Treatment
for portal hypertension is of utmost importance in patients with risky varices or ruptured varices, but the present case as well as recent
reports demonstrate the efficacy of interventional percutaneous transhepatic coil embolization for variceal ruptures of the intestine.
Nevertheless, clinicians encountering liver transplant recipients with melena should be aware of the possibility of late-onset rupture of
ectopic varices, even in patients with an uneventful post-transplant course without portal hypertension. Abbreviations: MDCT = multidetector
computed tomography, TIPS = transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt. SA and NA conducted the study, collected the data, processed the
data, wrote the manuscript, and were responsible for proofreading the manuscript. MH, CS, TT, JK, JA, YS, KH, and ST proofread and approved
the manuscript. NK performed critical review and proofread the manuscript. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to
disclose. Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in
the HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal's Website (www.md-journal.com).
