Odontoameloblastoma is an extremely rare mixed odontogenic tumor with both epithelial and mesenchymal components. The term
odontoameloblastoma first appeared in the 1971 World Health Organization classification (Pindborg JJ., et al.) and is defined as “a neoplasm
that includes odontogenic ectomesenchyme in addition to odontogenic epithelium that resembles an ameloblastoma in both structures and
behavior.” Because of the aggressive nature and risk of recurrence of the tumor, complete resection is essential. In this report, we
describe an extremely rare case of a patient with massive odontoameloblastoma arising in the maxilla and occupying maxillary sinus. In 2013,
an 11-year-old Japanese boy was referred to our department for a painless and large mass of the right maxillary region. A panoramic X-ray
showed a unilocular cystic lesion in the right maxilla containing a calcified mass in the lesion associated with an impacted tooth. Computed
tomography showed a cystic lesion that included calcified structures and measured 3.6×3.1×2.7 cm. In 2013, the patient underwent tumor
extirpation combined with impacted tooth extraction. The histopathological diagnosis was an odontoameloblastoma. No recurrence was noted 27
months after the operation. The patient has undergone postoperative occlusal guidance and functional orthodontic treatment, and his
postoperative condition is excellent. However, postoperative recurrence or malignant transformation can occur in cases of
odontoameloblastoma, and close long-term follow-up will be continued for our patient. Odontoameloblastoma (OA) is an extremely rare mixed
odontogenic tumor that is defined in the current World Health Organization tumor classification system as a tumor that includes odontogenic
ectomesenchyme and odontogenic epithelium and resembles an ameloblastoma in both structure and behavior . Generally, the clinical
presentation of OA resembles an odontoma; thus, a definitive diagnosis is based on histologic analysis following excision and curettage . OA
and complex odontoma belong to a group of odontogenic tumors that consist of odontogenic epithelium and odontogenic ectomesenchyme with or
without dental hard tissue formation (so-called mixed odontogenic tumors) [3, 4]. However, differential diagnosis of OA is difficult
compared with ameloblastic fibroodontoma or a developing complex odontoma . OA is usually found in young patients and has no significant
gender predilection [6, 7]. Clinically, the two main complaints are swelling and failure of tooth eruption. Radiological examination usually
reveals a multilocular radiolucency with a well-defined boundary and often shows radiopaque areas resembling mature dental tissue . If an
unerupted tooth is present, the tumor is usually situated coronally to the crown of this tooth [6, 8]. We report an extremely rare case of a
patient with massive OA arising in the maxilla and occupying the maxillary sinus. In 2013, an 11-year-old Japanese boy was referred to our
department for painless bone expansion in the right maxillary alveolus, delayed eruption of the permanent second molar teeth, and altered
occlusion. He had no significant medical or family history. A panoramic X-ray showed a unilocular cystic lesion in the right maxilla
containing a calcified large mass associated with an impacted tooth (Fig. 1). Computed tomography showed a cystic lesion of size 3.6×3.1×2.7
cm that included calcified structures (Fig. 2a). A horizontal view showed right maxillary bone expansion (Fig. 2b).Fig. 1An unilocular
cystic lesion in the right maxilla containing calcified mass in the lesion associated with impacted tooth (arrow)Fig. 2Computed tomographic
images. a Axial view computed tomographic image showing a cystic lesion of size 3.6×3.1×2.7 cm that included calcified structures. b
Horizontal view computed tomographic scan showing right maxillary bone expansion (arrows) An unilocular cystic lesion in the right maxilla
containing calcified mass in the lesion associated with impacted tooth (arrow) Computed tomographic images. a Axial view computed
tomographic image showing a cystic lesion of size 3.6×3.1×2.7 cm that included calcified structures. b Horizontal view computed tomographic
scan showing right maxillary bone expansion (arrows) In 2013, the patient underwent tumor extirpation combined with impacted tooth
extraction. The incisional line was started from the labial mucosa in the right maxillary central and lateral incisor area. It extended to
the gingiva in the right maxillary lateral incisor and canine area by arch-like incision, and to the gingiva of the right maxillary second
molar by crestal incision with distal releasing incision. The goal of this procedure was to make a mucoperiosteal flap from the lower border
of the pyriform aperture, vertically to the infraorbital foramen and surrounding areas, and horizontally to the lower border of the
zygomatic bone. The infraorbital neurovascular bundles were preserved. Upon opening of the sinus from a thin plate of bone in the canine
fossa and surrounding areas in the anterior wall of the right maxilla (the same level as the lower border of the pyriform aperture), bone-
like hard tissues that were strongly adhered to the maxilla were found. When these tissues were separated from the surrounding areas and
removed using a fissure bar, a solid, bone-like, hard odontogenic tumor (similar to a complex odontoma) was found to have occupied almost
the whole sinus. The mass was too large to remove from the opening. For complete removal of the mass including the tumor capsule, which was
adhered to the surrounding bone, the tumor was divided into several pieces using a fissure bar (Fig. 3). There was an unerupted permanent
tooth in the posterior part of the maxillary sinus anterior wall directly above the tumor resection site. This tooth appeared to have been
pushed up by the tumor. It deviated from the dental arch and was included in the tumor body. This made preservation difficult, and the tooth
was extracted (Fig. 4). A part of the root apex of the right maxillary first molar protruded through the tumor resection site, and
conservative treatment was applied because of the patient’s age. There was no tooth germ of the unerupted second molar in the tumor
resection cavity. There was access between the sinus and the tumor resection cavity, but there were no signs of maxillary sinusitis, which
allowed use of conservative treatment. After hemostasis was confirmed, the incision was stitched closed. After the tumor extirpation, the
wound was sutured with VICRYL absorbable stitches (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA). Examination of the surgical specimen showed that the
lesion consisted of various hard tissues, including a tooth-like structure (Fig. 4). A histological examination indicated the presence of a
mixture of dentin and enamel with a radial structure (Fig. 5a). Fibrous tissues were observed between the hard tissues, which suggested mild
mononuclear cell infiltration. Furthermore, the hard tissues were covered by fibrous tissues, and odontogenic epithelial-like cell
structures were externally elongated from the inside to the outer boundary of the hard tissues. A palisade arrangement of cylindrical cells
was seen in the margin of the odontogenic epithelial-like cell structures, and stellate cells had proliferated in the alveolar structures
(Fig. 5b and c). Cellular atypism was unremarkable, and there were few Ki-67-positive cells. These features confirmed the diagnosis of an
OA. The histopathological diagnosis was OA.Fig. 3Intraoperative view showing extirpation of the tumor arising in the maxilla (arrow)Fig.
4Surgical specimensFig. 5 a Histopathological image (hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification ×100). A histological examination
indicated the presence of a mixture of dentin and enamel with a radial structure. b, c Histopathological images (hematoxylin and eosin
stain, original magnification ×200). A palisade arrangement of cylindrical cells was seen in the margin of the odontogenic epithelial-like
cell structures, and stellate cells had proliferated in the alveolar structures Intraoperative view showing extirpation of the tumor arising
in the maxilla (arrow) Surgical specimens a Histopathological image (hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification ×100). A
histological examination indicated the presence of a mixture of dentin and enamel with a radial structure. b, c Histopathological images
(hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification ×200). A palisade arrangement of cylindrical cells was seen in the margin of the
odontogenic epithelial-like cell structures, and stellate cells had proliferated in the alveolar structures No recurrence was noted at 27
months after the operation. The patient has undergone postoperative occlusal guidance and functional orthodontic treatment, and his
postoperative condition is excellent. OA is an aggressive odontogenic tumor characterized by simultaneous occurrence of an ameloblastoma and
a compound or complex odontoma in the same tumor mass [3, 9]. OA affects males and females equally and occurs in the maxilla and mandible,
with the molar-premolar area being the most common site. Clinical symptoms include slow, progressive swelling of the alveolar plates, bone
expansion, root resorption, dull pain, altered occlusion, tooth displacement, delayed eruption, and impacted teeth . OA occurs between the
ages of 2 and 50 years and at a mean age of 20.2 years . However, as in our patient, most cases occur in children under 16 years of age. The
origin of an OA has been proposed to be malignant transformation of the enamel epithelium after odontogenesis or malignant transformation of
the epithelium and mesenchyme of supernumerary teeth during embryogenesis . However, a definitive theory has yet to be established .
Furthermore, the disease is often accompanied by an impacted tooth, but the causative link between the tumor and the impacted tooth is
unclear. Thompson et al. suggested that the tumor capsule may be derived from mesenchymal tissue, based on the property of this tissue to
form dental hard tissue. The origin of our case was unclear, but between tumor and tumor capsule that similar to the dental follicle around
the impacted tooth was connected, with irregular structures and dentinal hyperplasia was seen, we guessed tumor transformation was caused by
interaction between the odontogenic epithelium which degenerated and mesenchymal tissue during the degenerated tooth process. This suggests
that tumor formation may occur during the process of crown formation of the impacted tooth. Ameloblastoma, complex odontoma, compound
odontoma, and dentigerous cysts may be differentiated by imaging, but their diagnosis also requires histopathological examination. A
definitive diagnosis is difficult to make on the basis of imaging and clinical findings alone; therefore, total excision is required.
Masqueda-Taylor et al. found recurrence in 3 (21.4 %) of 14 OA cases. On the basis of these data and findings that OA tends to occur at an
earlier age than conventional ameloblastoma and because it has a similar potential to produce bone expansion, root resorption, and
recurrence, it was suggested that OA should be treated similarly to ameloblastoma, with wide excision and close follow-up for at least 5
years . Therefore, the first-choice treatment for OA is complete surgical extirpation of the tumor, including wide excision. We also suggest
that treatment of OA requires close cooperation of oral and maxillofacial surgeons with orthodontic and pedodontic specialists, including
primary care dentists. This multidisciplinary treatment is required because most cases of OA in pediatric patients are associated with
displaced, unerupted permanent teeth. Clinically, OA starts as a slow-growing, painless mass that expands the alveolus and vestibular cortex
and prevents eruption of permanent teeth . Our patient had expansion in the right maxillary alveolus, prevention of eruption of permanent
teeth, altered occlusion, tooth displacement, delayed eruption, and impacted teeth. Most reported cases have had symptoms such as swelling
or pain, but in our patient the tumor was asymptomatic and was detected during a routine examination. OA also tends to produce bone
expansion in almost all cases, similarly to conventional ameloblastoma, whereas an odontoma seldom produces swelling of the affected region.
Therefore, OA is often confused with compound or complex odontomas, as in our patient. Our patient has had no recurrence for 27 months
postoperatively. However, the recurrence rate of OA is 21.4 % , and malignant transformation may occur . Therefore, long-term follow-up will
be continued for our patient. We report an extremely rare case of a patient with massive OA arising in the maxilla and occupying the
maxillary sinus. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardian(s) for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Odontoameloblastoma
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MK contributed as main author and in
surgical treatment and management, case report design, acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of surgical and pathological data,
and drafting of the manuscript. HH contributed by obtaining academic support and in case report design, acquisition of data, analysis and
interpretation of surgical and pathological data, and drafting of the manuscript. YS contributed through acquisition of data and providing
technical support. KO contributed by obtaining academic support and in surgical treatment and management and supervision, as well as in the
drafting of the manuscript. YI contributed through medical support and supervision. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
