This case demonstrates a rare variation in the pattern of injury and the presentation of acute lateral compartment syndrome of the leg.
Although uncommon, lateral compartment syndrome of the leg after an ankle inversion leading to peroneus longus muscle rupture has been
previously documented. This case was unusual because there was no overt ankle injury and the patient was able to continue physical activity,
in spite of a significant rupture of the peroneus longus muscle that was determined later. This case highlights the necessary vigilance
clinicians must maintain when assessing non-contact injuries in patients with possible compartment syndrome. Compartment syndrome represents
elevated pressure within a closed fascial space resulting in a decrease in capillary perfusion, which is necessary for tissue viability.1)
In the lower extremities, acute compartment syndrome usually results from a direct trauma. Obvious injuries such as blunt trauma, fractures,
and ankle sprains generate an elevated index of suspicion. However, the diagnosis becomes more difficult when the history is atypical, such
as when there is an exertional etiology or pain without any distinct trauma. Consideration of this diagnosis in the absence of trauma is
critical, as delayed treatment can result in the loss of motor and sensory functions, death of skeletal muscles, subsequent contracture, and
even amputation.2) The anterior compartment of the leg is more frequently associated with compartment syndrome; however, isolated
involvement of the lateral section is also possible. A known etiology of lateral compartment syndrome is peroneus longus muscle rupture or
avulsion, secondary to a distinct acute rotational ankle injury.34) After such injuries, the patient generally ceases activity immediately
and presents to the clinician with a clear history of trauma. Although non-traumatic cases of lateral compartment syndrome have also been
described, they are quite infrequent.56) This article presents a case of non-contact, acute lateral compartment syndrome of the leg
secondary to peroneus longus muscle rupture in a collegiate football player who continued athletic competition after sustaining the injury.
A 23-year-old male collegiate football player, who experienced a sharp pain in his left leg during practice, presented to an orthopaedic
surgeon for evaluation 18 hours after the incident. The athlete was reportedly participating in cutting drills when he experienced a sharp,
snapping pain in his left leg just distal to the fibular head. He reported no significant trauma nor was there any twisting or indirect
injury. He confirmed working through the pain and continuing the drills. The pain worsened throughout practice, which prompted him to
approach the athletic training staff. Ice, a compressive wrap, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were administered and the
patient was advised to go home and elevate the extremity. Due to escalating pain through the night, he was brought to the local emergency
department by a team trainer. An ultrasound revealed no evidence of deep venous thrombosis. After being prescribed a narcotic for the pain,
he was discharged to go home. However, the pain continued throughout the night and he began having paresthesias in the superficial peroneal
nerve distribution of his left foot. The trainer was contacted again the next morning and the patient was immediately brought to the
orthopedic operating center for further evaluation. Past medical and surgical histories of the patient were unremarkable. A review of
systems was notable for extreme pain in the left leg, but otherwise negative for any clinical illness. He confirmed taking NSAIDs and the
pain medication from the emergency department, but denied intake of any other medications, including supplements. On examination, the
patient appeared to be in significant distress. Visual inspection of his extremity revealed swelling over the lateral compartment, most
notably approximately 5 cm distal to the fibular head. There was no ecchymosis or open wound. Palpation revealed a tense and firm lateral
compartment. He held his foot in a plantarflexed and inverted position. There was no pain with the passive range of motion of his toes, as
well as with passive dorsiflexion and plantarflexion of the ankle. However, he experienced pain with both passive eversion and inversion of
his ankle, which he localized to his lateral compartment. The patient had gross numbness on the dorsum of his foot, including the first
dorsal web space, which was consistent with the superficial peroneal and deep peroneal nerve distributions. Sensation remained intact in the
lateral, medial, and plantar aspect of his foot. Capillary refill was less than 2 seconds and palpable dorsalis pedis and posterior tibialis
pulses were present. X-ray studies showed no evidence of a fracture. He was immediately taken to the operating room for fasciotomy; this was
approximately 19 hours postinjury. The preoperative diastolic blood pressure was measured as 86 mmHg. In the operating room, pressure was
measured using a Stryker handheld compartment pressure monitor (Stryker, Mahwah, NJ, USA): the lateral compartment measured 139 mmHg (delta
pressure = -53), the anterior compartment measured 89 mmHg (delta pressure = -3), the superficial posterior compartment measured 30 mmHg
(delta pressure = 56), and the deep posterior compartment measured 48 mmHg (delta pressure = 38). The patient underwent fasciotomies
involving a release of the anterior and lateral compartments. A linear incision was made midway between the tibial crest and the fibula. The
lateral compartment was then released, which exposed a large tear involving the proximal aspect of the peroneus longus muscle belly, which
was believed to be the cause of this compartment syndrome (Fig. 1). Approximately 20% to 25% of the peroneal musculature was dark burgundy,
friable, and unreactive to electrocauterization. Nonviable tissue was debrided until bleeding commenced and responsive muscle was obtained
(Fig. 2). A significant hematoma, which was present at the exit of the superficial peroneal nerve from the lateral compartment into the
anterior compartment, was removed. Next, an incision was made over the anterior compartment; it exposed viable musculature that was reactive
to electrocautery; therefore, no debridement was performed. Vertical mattress stitches were used to distally close the skin and cover the
peroneal nerve. Proximally, the incision was left open and a KCI V.A.C. Ulta Negative Pressure Wound Therapy System device (San Antonio, TX,
USA) was applied with a pressure of 125 mmHg on "continuous" mode (Fig. 3). Postoperatively, the ipsilateral foot was placed at 90Â° in a
posterior splint to prevent contracture. The initial recovery was unremarkable with immediate improvement in pain. On postoperative day two,
the patient was taken back to the operating room for repeat irrigation and debridement, removal of any nonviable muscle tissue, and partial
closure of the wound. Minimal debridement was necessary and 75% of the wound was closed while the wound VAC device was applied to the
remaining section. On postoperative day five, repeat irrigation, minimal debridement, and final closure of the wound were performed.
Initially, the patient was advised to bear weight as tolerated in a controlled ankle motion boot with eventual transition to crutches by 2
weeks postoperatively. During this time, he worked on ankle range of motion and conditioning using a stationary bike. By 3 weeks
postoperatively, sensation had returned to the dorsum of his foot. From postoperative weeks three to eight, he began manual resistance
training, and was transitioned to regular shoes. Eight weeks postoperatively, he was pain free with full range of ankle motion. He was
cleared for complete athletic participation at 12 weeks after surgery. Trauma, such as a contusion or crush injury to the soft tissue, is
typically responsible for compartment syndrome. However, a variety of other causes have also been described.7) Atypical presentations may
result in a delay in diagnosis or treatment, thereby increasing the chances of adverse medical-legal ramifications.8) Cases without a
fracture result in a significantly greater delay in fasciotomy than those with a fracture.9) Lower extremity compartment syndrome, isolated
to the lateral and/or anterior compartment secondary to musculotendinous injury, have been reported in literature.34) In nearly all reported
cases, the presentation occurred after a reported ankle inversion injury during participation in a competitive sport.346) In our patient,
the proposed mechanism is an acute muscle tear with resultant hemorrhage, producing elevated pressure within the lateral and anterior
compartments. However, comparable to another reported case in literature, our patient suffered this injury during non-contact exercise.4)
Also, the patient described his pain as originating just below his knee, which contrasts previous reports describing presentations more
consistent with an ankle sprain. Despite this discrepancy in presentation, intraoperative findings demonstrated a rupture of the peroneus
longus muscle belly and subsequent hematoma. This is consistent with the earlier proposed mechanism for resultant lateral and/or anterior
compartment syndrome. Peroneus longus tears are relatively uncommon injuries, often being the outcome of prolonged stress from persistent
ankle instability, peroneal dislocation, or tendonitis.10) Of note, the patient reported no correlated symptoms prior to injury. In
addition, rupture typically occurs at the level of the tendon bone interface.10) Previous reports of lateral compartment syndrome secondary
to peroneus longus muscle rupture all describe tears at the musculotendinous junction.34) Our patient suffered a more proximal rupture,
which provides a likely explanation for the difference in clinical presentation. The complications of unrecognized compartment syndrome can
be devastating. Having a high index of suspicion and performing serial physical examinations are critical for prompt diagnosis. A patient
with acute compartment syndrome rarely presents without a history of trauma. Our case, therefore, highlights a potentially missed diagnosis
and lends support for the practice of maintaining a high index of suspicion for lateral compartment syndrome, even after seemingly innocuous
injuries. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
