We presented a surgical technique including a suture bridge technique with relatively small incision for the reduction and fixation of
posterior ligament avulsion fractures. A suture anchor was used to hold the avulsed fragment and a knotless anchor was used to continuously
compress the bony fragment into the fracture site, thereby maintaining reduction during healing. Avulsion fractures of posterior cruciate
ligament (PCL) represent a specific form of PCL injuries.1) Improper treatment of this injury results in an incompetent PCL that leads to
knee instability and osteoarthritis.2) Therefore, previous reports recommend surgical treatment of displaced tibial avulsion fractures of
the PCL for achieving anatomical reduction and knee stability.3456) Many operative methods of these fractures are reported. Conventional
techniques using direct posterior or posteromedial approach are widely used despite the potential risk of complication, such as damage to
the neurovascular structure, tearing of the gastrocnemius muscle and scarring of the wound.78) Arthroscopic surgery has an advantage of less
soft tissue damage, however, it requires specialized equipment and experience.345) Optimal fixation method is another controversial issue.
Cancellous screws or cannulated screws are generally used for open reduction and internal fixation.7) However, screw fixation is indicated
only for the large and noncomminuted fragment.7) Small or comminuted fragments are difficult to fix; in addition, there is a potential risk
of fragmentation of the fracture fragment. In this study, we introduced a surgical technique, consisting of open reduction using
posteromedial approach and internal fixation with suture bridge technique for tibial avulsion fracture of the PCL. The indications for our
approach were as follows: (1) isolated PCL avulsion fracture; and (2) posterior tibial sag present at 90° of knee flexion. Intra-articular
lesions except PCL avulsion fracture were excluded using preoperative magnetic resonance image because of posteromedial approach and the
consequential prone position. Operations were carried out under epidural or general anesthesia. A C-arm device was used to avoid the
penetration of growth plate by the anchors in pediatric or adolescent patients. Patients were placed in the prone position, with the knee
flexed 20° to 30°. An oblique incision of < 10 cm was made between semitendinosus tendon and medial head of the gastrocnemius (Fig. 1A). The
medial head of the gastrocnemius was held laterally to expose the posterior capsule of the knee joint. Capsulotomy with an L-shaped incision
was made longitudinally and then extended laterally to expose the fracture site (Fig. 1B). After debridement of fracture site, 2 suture
based anchors (3.5 mm; Biomet Sports Medicine, Warsaw, IN, USA) were inserted into the superomedial and superolateral region of the fracture
site. Sutures were passed through the osteotendinous junction in a mattress fashion and then tied. Each suture limb from the proximal row
was placed through the hole at the end of the push-lock device (3.5 mm; Bio-PushLock, Arthrex Inc., Naples, FL, USA). Pilot holes for the
push-lock device were created using a punch just inferior to the distal edge of the fracture site. A pushlock device was inserted into the
pilot hole while maintaining a constant tension. After the device was fully engaged in the pilot hole, the sutures were cut. The use of a
knotless anchor provides a compressive force and consequently fixes the reduced avulsion fragment strongly to the fracture bed (Fig. 1C-E).
The wound was closed in layer, and a sterile dressing was applied. If the patients were children, the anchors were inserted so as not to
penetrate a physeal plate. A well-padded plaster splint was applied to the knee at 5° to 10° of flexion. On the first day, after surgery,
the drain was removed and patients were encouraged to start quadriceps muscle strengthening exercise and begin non-weight bearing walking
using crutches. After 2 weeks, protected range of motion exercise was started and partial weight bearing ambulation using crutches was
permitted with locked brace in full extension. Six weeks later, the brace was unlocked and the patients began full weight bearing
ambulation. At 8 weeks, the brace was removed and patients were encouraged to increase activity gradually. A 20-year-old man presented with
a right knee injury resulting from a motor vehicle accident. Clinical examination revealed a swollen knee, limited range of motion and
posterior tibial sag at 90° on knee flexion. The operation was performed 2 days after the injury. The knee range of motion was 135° with a
flexion 135° and flexion contracture 0° after 2 weeks postoperatively. Bony union was achieved after 4 months postoperatively. The patient
was able to return to his usual daily activities after postoperative 6 months (Fig. 2). A 13-year-old boy presented with left knee injury
resulting from a fall. Clinical examination revealed hemarthrosis of the knee, limited range of motion, and posterior tibial sag. The
operation was performed 1 day after the injury. The knee range of motion was 140° with flexion 140° and flexion contracture 0° after 4 weeks
postoperative. Bony union was achieved after 3 months postoperative. The patient returned to his previous sports activities (Fig. 3).
Currently, open reduction or arthroscopic fixation is more commonly used in treatment of displaced PCL tibial bony avulsion.3456) The latter
has both advantages and disadvantages. Since the site of attachment of the PCL to the tibia is located deep within the posterior tibial
plateau, multiple arthroscopic sutures and tunnels are required, making the procedure more challenging and difficult. Furthermore, some
authors reported that arthroscopic fixation using suspensory device needs a sizeable drill hole that may break thinner bone fragments.9)
Open reduction can be performed with a traditional S-shaped approach, but this incision is associated with injury to adjacent neurovascular
structures. In contrast, we used a less invasive posteromedial approach, which had several advantages, including exposure of the posterior
capsule through the gap between the medial head of the gastrocnemius and the semitendinosus muscle. With the approach in this study, it is
possible to minimize risks of damage to vessels and nerves, as well as providing satisfactory exposure of the fracture site. Similar methods
using posteromedial approach with suture anchors are previously reported.6) These studies used 2 suture anchors and fixed bony fragment by
knotting with the sutures of 2 suture anchors. However, we used suture bridge fixation technique with suture anchors and sutureless anchors.
The most important advantage of the present suture bridge fixation technique with posteromedial incision, is its indication for use
regardless of the thickness, size, and comminution of bony fragment. This technique is similar to the double-row, trans-osseous equivalent
or suture bridge techniques for rotator cuff repair or internal reduction and fixation of greater tubercle fractures of the humerus. It
allows for a simple reproducible anatomic reduction and compression of the fracture fragment, even though the fragment is small or
comminuted. Furthermore, suture anchor is relatively small, as compared to other fixation devices, such as cannulated screws, wires,
sutures, and absorbable screws. In addition, no second operation is required to remove the fixation device. The anchor also offers strong
purchase, and the attached suture can resist strong tension, resulting in reliable fixation. Previous study on anterior cruciate ligament
avulsion fracture, reported that suture bridge construct provides superior fixation with regard to ultimate load, as compared with standard
screw fixation and suture fixation in biomechanical analysis of suture bridge fixation for tibial eminence fractures.10) Similarly, the
suture bridge mattress fixation in this study may provide enough ultimate load and compressive force to the avulsed fragment and thus
maximize the surface area for bony healing. Furthermore, there is no risk of causing comminution. In conclusion, the results of the study
indicated that the posteromedial approach, combined with suture anchors, is a suitable treatment for isolated tibial avulsion fractures of
the PCL. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
