Pheochromocytoma is a neuroendocrine tumor that predominantly presents with hypertension, palpitations, and tachycardia due to excessive
catecholamine excretion. Although pheochromocytoma multisystem crisis (PMC) is relatively rare, urologists and clinicians should focus on
early diagnosis as delay in initiating the appropriate treatment can lead to mortality A 70-year-old man developed ileus after a few days of
medication for hypertension. Computed tomography incidentally revealed a left adrenal mass. This finding together with his clinical course
was compatible with pheochromocytoma. An α-blocker was administered immediately, and his blood pressure was well controlled. However, his
general condition and laboratory data deteriorated rapidly, and the patient was diagnosed with PMC with lethal status. Thus, emergency
adrenalectomy was performed without confirmation of catecholamine levels. From the resected specimen, his tumor was judged as
pheochromocytoma. On immunohistochemical analysis, the proliferation index evaluated by Ki-67 staining was 9.7 %. This case report was
approved by the Human Ethics Review Committee of the Nagasaki University Hospital. The present case of PMC was successfully treated with
emergency surgery. The benign pheochromocytoma also presented with high cell proliferation potential, which may be a cause of the extreme
aggressiveness of PMC. Pheochromocytoma is a relatively rare neuroendocrine tumor that predominantly presents with proximal or sustained
hypertension, palpitations, tachycardia, and sweating due to excessive catecholamine release. These symptoms are often severe, and some
patients can enter ‘pheochromocytoma crisis’ [1, 2]. Patients judged to be in pheochromocytoma crisis require treatment with
antihypertensive drugs and transfusion. The standard treatment for ‘non-crisis’ pheochromocytoma is generally preoperative preparation with
an α-blocker and surgical resection . Pheochromocytoma multisystem crisis (PMC) is a fatal condition characterized by multiple organ
failure, severe blood pressure variability, high fever, and encephalopathy . Importantly, PMC is not synonymous with malignant hypertension
caused by the massive release of catecholamine’s from the pheochromocytoma. Indeed, several patients with PMC were reported to be
normotensive or hypotensive [3, 4]. In addition, the symptoms and pathological conditions of PMC vary greatly. Abdominal pain, nausea, and
dyspnea are common, while anemia, back pain, night sweat, and acidosis have also been reported . Therefore, many patients with PMC are
unrecognized at diagnosis . The treatment strategy for patients with PMC requires particular attention, as delayed therapy can lead to
severe sequelae or mortality. Detailed information on the diagnosis and treatment of PMC is important for physicians. In addition,
understanding the pathological characteristics of PMC is essential for developing diagnostic tools and treatment strategies. Unfortunately,
there are few reports on the molecular biological findings or pathological characteristics in PMC patients . Herein, we report a case of a
patient with PMC who was successfully treated with emergency surgery. We also provide a literature review of the symptoms, data, treatments,
and outcome of patients with PMC, as well as the relationship between cell proliferation and malignant potential in pheochromocytoma. The
present case report presents new and important information for future studies on PMC. The authors obtained approval from the Human Ethics
Review Committee of Nagasaki University Hospital for the publication of this report. A 70-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for
ileus and uncontrollable high blood pressure. His systolic blood pressure exceeded 160 mmHg, and oral diltiazem and amilodipin were
initiated 5 days before the onset of ileus. Computed tomography showed a left adrenal mass and ileus (Fig. 1). His consciousness level was
low with incoherent speech. His body temperature was 37.4 °C, pulse rate was 126 bpm, blood pressure was 210/146 mmHg, and SpO2 was 98 % on
room air. He appeared to be sweating profusely, with cold moist peripheries. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm tachycardia and short PQ,
high voltage, mitral P, and negative T on V4–6. Abdominal radiography showed large intestine expansion due to gas. Initial laboratory data
showed low thrombocyte count (74,000/μL), normal white blood cell count (6000/μL), high levels of hemoglobin (16.3 g/dL), C-reactive protein
(9.30 mg/dL), serum glucose (201 mg/dL), and blood urea nitrogen (48 mg/dL), and normal level of serum creatinine (1.05 mg/dL). Amino-
terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide was extremely high at 13,938.0 ng/mL.Fig. 1Abdominal computed tomography revealed a large left
adrenal mass with heterogeneous enhancement and extended intensity compatible with ileus Abdominal computed tomography revealed a large left
adrenal mass with heterogeneous enhancement and extended intensity compatible with ileus We suspected pheochromocytoma on the basis of his
computed tomography findings and clinical features. Doxazosin (2 mg/day orally), nicardipine (1.5 μg/kg/h i.v.), and landiolol (200 mg/day
i.v.) were administered for blood pressure control. Because of the high fever, we suspected necrotizing enteritis due to ileus. Therefore,
intravenous antibiotics were administered. Moreover, creatinine kinase and lactose dehydrogenase increased rapidly to 7066 and 609 IU/L,
respectively. At that time, his body temperature was 40.1 °C. His respiratory state was aggravated after 3 days in the hospital, and oxygen
was started. Laboratory tests showed that renal and liver functions were deteriorating. Five days after hospitalization, tracheal intubation
was performed in the intensive care unit. Artificial ventilation and continuous hemodiafiltration were started. The patient was diagnosed
with PMC on the basis of the clinical course and radiological findings, without considering serum catecholamine levels. We performed
emergency left adrenalectomy despite his critical condition, as he showed poor control and was refractory to medical treatment.
Intraoperatively, the anesthesiologist used several types of antihypertensive drugs including doxazosin, landiolol hydrochloride, and
diltiazem as necessary. Although temporary blood pressure was reduced to 80/46 mmHg after removal of the adrenal gland, the patient’s vital
signs stabilized quickly after catecholamine infusion. Postoperatively, the patient’s blood catecholamine levels intraoperatively were:
epinephrine 10,351 (normal range ≤100 ng/mL), norepinephrine 27,654 ng/mL (normal range 100–450 ng/mL), and dopamine 209,500 ng/mL (normal
range ≤20 ng/mL). The patient recovered rapidly postoperatively. One day postoperatively, his body temperature normalized. Furthermore,
lactose dehydrogenase, creatinine kinase, liver function, respiratory status, and consciousness began to improve. He was weaned from
ventilatory support at 2 days postoperatively, and from continuous hemodiafiltration and catecholamine administration at 3 days
postoperatively. He was discharged 37 days postoperatively. Various imaging examinations including computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging were performed during hospitalization to reconfirm the absence of metastatic mass. He has had no tumor recurrence or
metastasis for 2 years. The resected tumor was 12 × 11 × 8 cm in size and weighed 530 g, with prominent central necrosis and internal
bleeding (Fig. 2). Histologically, the tumor had a capsule and was comprised of basophilic granular cells with polygonal features (Fig. 3).
On immunohistochemistry, the specimen stained positive for chromogranin A, NCAM, and S100. Therefore, the tumor was identified as a
pheochromocytoma. The cell proliferation index measured using an anti-Ki-67 antibody was 9.7 % (Fig. 4).Fig. 2Resected specimen showing a
tumor measuring 14 cm in diameter. There was hemorrhage and necrosis within the tumorFig. 3Hematoxylin-eosin staining (magnification:
×40)Fig. 4Ki-67 staining. The distribution of Ki-67-stained cells was nonspecific (magnification: ×200) Resected specimen showing a tumor
measuring 14 cm in diameter. There was hemorrhage and necrosis within the tumor Hematoxylin-eosin staining (magnification: ×40) Ki-67
staining. The distribution of Ki-67-stained cells was nonspecific (magnification: ×200) The incidence of pheochromocytoma is approximately
0.1 % in the hypertensive population . Pheochromocytoma typically arises from the adrenal medulla, although may develop in chromaffin cells
in or around sympathetic ganglia . The standard treatment for symptomatic pheochromocytoma is generally surgical resection. PMC is a more
severe and potentially lethal condition of pheochromocytoma, and represents an endocrinological emergency . Therefore, clinicians should
have detailed information regarding the symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of PMC, despite its rarity. Several previous reports have
stressed the importance of emergency treatment for PMC to avoid death [2, 6]. Indeed, all European cases of PMC without surgical resection
(5/12, 41.7 %) died despite conservative treatment (Table 1). The results of physical examination and hormonal studies in previous PMC cases
are shown in Table 1. Although extremely high blood pressure and fever are characteristics of PMC, two patients had no high-grade fever.
Other signs and symptoms of PMC have been reported . Therefore, accurate diagnosis on the basis of vital signs, symptoms, and physical
examination can be difficult.Table 1Characteristics, physical conditions, treatments, and outcomes of patients with pheochromocytoma
multisystem crisisSexAge (years)S/DBP (mmHg)BT (°C)Size (cm)AdNAdDopaOperation (days)b OutcomeYear (Times of upper
limit)F53210/110406.3101.1103.5–Not performedDied1988 F62285/14040.51096.014.8–EmergencySurvived1988 F50200/9040743.323.4–7Survived1988
F65120/8039.54–––>21Survived1993 M31164/4041.0–10a 6.7a 1.3a 36Survived1997 F50160/10041.5––––Not performedDied2002
F41190/13041.0–––––Survived2006 F26160/110–4.5–––Not performedDied2008 M39240/140–5.541.049.6–EmergencySurvived2008 F52300/20039.910–––Not
performedDied2010 F52162/10435.8–103.553.953.1–Survived2010 M27160/120–5–––Not performedDied2012
M70210/14640.151047.561.5103.55SurvivedPresent M male, F female, S/DBP systolic/diastolic blood pressure, BT body temperature, Ad adrenalin,
NAd noradrenalin, Dopa dopamine, Ref reference number a24 h urine correction bOperation day following admission Characteristics, physical
conditions, treatments, and outcomes of patients with pheochromocytoma multisystem crisis M male, F female, S/DBP systolic/diastolic blood
pressure, BT body temperature, Ad adrenalin, NAd noradrenalin, Dopa dopamine, Ref reference number a24 h urine correction bOperation day
following admission Our patient presented with hypertension and ileus at onset, while subsequent computed tomography performed to examine
the ileus revealed a left adrenal tumor. On admission, the patient did not present with high fever but showed a slight disturbance of
consciousness and extremely high blood pressure. Despite blood pressure control with α1-blocker treatment after hospitalization, his body
temperature increased and consciousness worsened. Moreover, liver dysfunction and respiratory distress developed. Thus, his symptoms met the
diagnostic criteria of PMC. On the basis of these findings, we opted for emergency surgery before confirmation of blood catecholamine levels
and Methoxy-Isobutyl-Isonitrile (MIBI) scintigraphy. His condition improved dramatically after surgery. He was weaned from continuous
hemodiafiltration and respiration, catecholamine administration, and intubation at 4 days postoperatively. Our case provides further support
that surgical resection is important for preventing mortality in patients with PMC. Nevertheless, the appropriate timing of surgery remains
unclear. As shown in Table 1, surgery on the day following admission may not be associated with outcome [2, 10, 11]. In addition, other
vital signs and clinicopathological features do not appear to be associated with outcome [2, 5, 6, 9–14]. Thus, in addition to the
difficulty in diagnosis, the optimal treatment strategies for patients with PMC remain unclear. The proliferation index evaluated by Ki-67
is commonly used to assess the cell-cycle. A number of case series have reported a PI measured by Ki-67 staining of less than 1 % in benign
pheochromocytoma [15, 16] (Table 2). By contrast, our case of benign pheochromocytoma showed an extremely high level of cell proliferation
potential, with a PI of 9.7 %. The relationships between cell proliferation and pathological characteristics including hormone secretion,
tumor size, and symptoms in benign pheochromocytoma are not fully understood, although PI was reported to be significantly associated with
capsule invasion of pheochromocytoma . The relationship between the aggressiveness of PMC and cell proliferation is unknown, as this is the
first report on cell proliferation in PMC. Speculatively, the high proliferative potential despite benign tumor status may be a
characteristic of PMC that contributes to its aggressive characteristics and severe symptoms in patients.Table 2Mean proliferation indexes
of benign and malignant adrenal pheochromocytomaBenign N23b 16932120–414414 PI (%)10.750.210.9<1–0.8<12.2Malignant N10153643c 435117 PI
(%)513.93.04.3<17.81.4–14.1 Cut-offa >3≥3>2.5––>5>2>5–Year199820002000200120032004200820102012Reference PI proliferation index aCut-off of
PI (%) between benign and malignant pheochromocytoma bIncluding extra-adrenal tumors cPatients without metastasis at diagnosis Mean
proliferation indexes of benign and malignant adrenal pheochromocytoma PI proliferation index aCut-off of PI (%) between benign and
malignant pheochromocytoma bIncluding extra-adrenal tumors cPatients without metastasis at diagnosis PI is also a useful marker for
distinguishing benign from malignant pheochromocytoma . We identified nine studies in PubMed describing a PI cut-off in adrenal malignant
pheochromocytoma tissues; the suggested cut-offs for predicting malignant behavior are shown in Table 2. The PI in the present case was
relatively higher than the mean PI in malignant pheochromocytoma, indicating malignant and metastatic potential. However, no recurrence or
metastatic mass was detected at 2 years postoperatively. Nevertheless, follow-up with imaging and hormonal studies are required as a part of
the pheochromocytoma can recur in various organ types . We report a case of rapidly progressing and life-threatening PMC. Although it is
generally difficult to decide on the surgical strategy for patients with PMC, emergency surgery is important for achieving a favorable
outcome. Therefore, urologists and clinicians should be aware of this rare life-threatening condition. In addition, we speculate that the
aggressive characteristics of PMC may be due to a high proliferative potential. Additional studies examining the pathological
characteristics of the disease at the molecular level are required to determine the biological characteristics of PMC and to develop
strategies for diagnosis and treatment. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this Case Report and
any accompanying images. pheochromocytoma multisystem crisis proliferation index methoxy-Isobutyl-Isonitrile YM and HS were responsible for
the concept, design, and drafting of the manuscript. YM obtained approval from the institutional ethical review board. KK, YS, TH, SI, MS,
JF, and KN were responsible for acquisition of the patients’ data. KT and TI critically reviewed and amended the manuscript for important
intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Mr. Takumi Shimogama for his outstanding
support. This work was not supported by any funding. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
