Renal cell carcinoma with the distinct type of t(6;11)(p21;q12) translocation (transcription factor EB) is a rare neoplasm. In the present
case study, we show for the first time an autophagy signature in a patient with transcription factor EB renal cell carcinoma. We attempted
to characterize the mutational and expressional features of a t(6;11)(p21;q12) renal cell carcinoma, in an effort to address the potential
for molecular guidance of personalized medical decision for a case in this renal cell carcinoma category. We report the case of a 42-year-
old white man who had a late relapse of his renal cell carcinoma. The first diagnosis of clear cell renal carcinoma was derived from a
histological examination; analyzing the metastasis and going back to the primary tumor it turned out to be a transcription factor EB-renal
cell carcinoma. The treatment plan included local radiation and systemic therapy. As part of the multimodal approach, tumor samples for
genetic assessment were obtained. However, there is no recommended standard therapy for transcription factor EB-renal cell carcinoma.
Despite four lines of medical treatment with targeted therapy and one checkpoint inhibitor, all attempts to prolong the patient’s survival
failed. During the course of this unusual disease, we gained insights which, to the best of our knowledge, were unknown before in the
expression of the gene signature linked to autophagy. This might in part explain the resistance to conventional targeted therapy
acknowledged in our patient. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13256-015-0749-7) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users. The translocation involves on chromosome 6 the MITF transcription factor family member transcription factor
EB (TFEB), and on chromosome 11 the metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT1). It has previously been shown that the
TFEB transcription factor is involved in the regulation of autophagy (see for a review of the role of TFEB in this setting). Sardiello et
al. defined an autophagy gene network regulating lysosomal biogenesis and function through a systematic study of TFEB upregulation .
Indirectly, these features can be observed immunohistochemically when tumor cells express cathepsin K in the cytoplasm . This is a
consequence of the dysregulation induced by the translocation, as TFEB controls cathepsin K expression. TFEB protein is highly expressed in
osteoclasts and TFEB is linked to RANKL activity . Among the published cases of this pathologic translocation variant, it appears that the
therapeutic targets against common renal cell carcinoma (RCC) may not be effective against translocation type RCC, possibly due to distinct
molecular alterations of these carcinomas . A 42-year-old white man had a history of kidney cancer from 2005. At that time, his right kidney
was removed, and RCC was concluded on the basis of histology. The disease was staged as T3apN0M0 (TNM-Union for International Cancer
Control, TNM-UICC, 2010). The cancer was regarded as localized and no further investigation was undertaken at the time. In the winter of
2013, the patient consulted his general practitioner for increasing right-sided lateral chest pain. Computed tomography (CT) of his thorax
revealed a lateral mass destructing his third rib, without penetrating through the pleural cavity. Several biopsies were obtained and the
tumor was confirmed as clear cell RCC. However, the pathologist responsible had doubts about the correct histology and consulted experts in
the field for a second opinion abroad. Techniques including Sanger sequencing of the candidate translocation region and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) confirmed a translocation including TFEB (t6;11), which is diagnostic of RCC. Immunohistochemistry was positive for
cathepsin K and Melan-A, which supported the diagnosis. Further investigation of the patient with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Fig. 1)
of his vertebral column showed small lesions in his lower lumbar spine, suspicious of tumor spreading to his skeleton. This clinical
picture, and the first immunohistochemical results showing intensive staining of cathepsin K, pointed to dysfunctional activity in
osteoclasts, and linked therapeutic choices to autophagy and metabolism. He was referred to surgical resection of the part of his chest wall
afflicted by a tumor mass, which was conducted at the University Hospital Oslo in September 2013. Postoperatively, he received irradiation
to the tumor bed, 3 Gy per fraction to a total dose of 30 Gy.Fig. 1Magnetic resonance imaging visualizing metastatic spine lesion (arrow)
Magnetic resonance imaging visualizing metastatic spine lesion (arrow) Today, there is no commonly accepted treatment recommendation for
non-RCC. Pending the final histology report, while having the clinicopathological suspicion of translocational RCC, several therapeutical
strategies were discussed. In the light of no available standard treatment for patients with translocational RCC, a mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor (everolimus 10 mg daily) counteracting phosphorylation of TFEB by mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and denosumab (120 mg
subcutaneously every fourth week), a monoclonal antibody regulating osteoclast activity by targeting the RANK ligand, were both applied
during and after postsurgical radiotherapy. This therapeutic strategy aimed to counteract the dysfunctional signaling effect in catabolism
and bone reabsorption as described for TFEB tumors. In addition, the formerly nephrectomized patient had moderately reduced kidney function
after the operation, and needed self-catheterization. Often tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) affect kidney function, supporting an mTOR
pharmacological treatment instead of TKI for this patient. Unfortunately, everolimus led to thrombocytopenia and had to be reduced to 7.5 mg
per day taken orally. During the next 2 months, the patient’s health deteriorated, and the mTOR-inhibitor therapy was eventually
interrupted. A new series of MRI (Fig. 1) confirmed progression, with multiple additional bony lesions. The patient was treated with a
broadly acting TKI, pazopanib (800 mg once daily) as second-line medical treatment, interfering with platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathways. At the same time, neither anti-1-amino-3-18F-fluorocyclobutane-1-carboxylic acid
(18F-FACBC) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT nor 2-deoxy-2-(18F)fluoro-D-glucose (18F-FDG) PET/CT scans detected tumor spreading.
Acknowledging the difficulty in identifying a rational therapeutic approach, the patient consented to serial biopsies taken in February and
June 2014, preceding the choice of a new treatment due to a major lesion in his sacrum. Both samples were then assessed molecularly by
Agilent SureSelect exome capture with Illumina sequencing, and expression profiling using bead arrays from Illumina. Ribonucleic acid (RNA)
extraction from the tumor taken at the first time point was split in two parts and a TissueLyser (Qiagen) was used to disrupt the sample.
RNA from both parts was extracted using a GenElute Mammalian Total RNA Miniprep Kit (Sigma-Aldrich), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. DNA was extracted from the tumor taken at the second time point, using the NucleoSpin Tissue Kit (Macherey-Nagel), according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. Normal DNA was extracted from ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) blood using the NucleoSpin Blood Midi
Kit (Macherey-Nagel), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Normal and tumor DNA was subjected to whole exome sequencing using the
SureSelect whole exome v5 and Illumina sequencing by synthesis technology (HiSeq 2500) following the supplier’s protocol. The resulting
FASTQ files were further analyzed using an in-house developed pipeline for somatic event detection. Reads of the tumor and its matched
control sample were separately mapped with BWA-MEM to human reference genome (build b37) with an added decoy contig, obtained from . Sample-
wise sorting and duplicate marking was performed on the initial alignments with Picard tools . Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) tools were
subsequently used for two-step local realignment around indels (in this step, both samples were processed together). Each sample’s pair-end
read information was then checked for inconsistencies with Picard, and base-quality recalibration was performed by GATK. Somatic variant
calling on the sample pair was done with MuTect (somatic single nucleotide variant, SNV, detection), Strelka (somatic SNV and INDEL
detection), DELLY (large-scale variation – deletions, duplications, translocations and inversions – detection) and VarScan2 (somatic copy
number variation, CNV, analysis). GATK tools were used for computing coverage statistics based on the recalibrated alignment files. Most of
the analysis (starting with the local realignment step) was limited to exome regions, defined by Agilent sequencing probes (for further
details, see Additional file 1). One translocation was identified through sequencing, involving positions chr11:65,267,772 and
chr6:41,659,234, involving the expected TFEB translocation previously described for this patient. We identified 23 somatic single SNVs, and
three insertion/deletion events. Among these, one mutated gene was located in the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor pathway (MAP3K7,
G110V), a pathway previously implicated in clear cell RCC . However, no obvious candidate therapeutic target genes were identified as
mutated. A DNA copy number plot is shown in Fig. 2. Gain of a region of 1q including the gene KIF14 has previously been associated with
fatal progression, and KIF14 was among the genes reported to be overexpressed in tumors with 1q . We did identify a somatic mutation for
this gene (H849Y), but the tumorigenic potential remains unclear. Other chromosome arm scale events with more or less clear breaks could be
seen on chromosomes 1, 3, 18 and 22. Some chromosomes (9, 13, 19) appeared to be generally underrepresented by sequencing reads in the
tumor, while some other chromosomes (for example 2 and 7) seemed to be affected by many smaller events.Fig. 2Copy number analysis by
chromosome (using VarScan2/DNAcopy) Copy number analysis by chromosome (using VarScan2/DNAcopy) Transcriptome analysis was performed using
the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA with Ribo-Zero Gold from Illumina according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNAa-Seq library was
sequenced using a HiSeq 2500 with a paired-end 2×100 base pair (bp) approach. The sequencing reads were mapped with TopHat2 to human
reference genome/transcriptome (build hg19) and subsequently processed by the Cufflinks2 tools (cufflinks, cuffmerge, cuffdiff) in order to
generate a gene-wise fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads (FPKM) expression (Table 1).Table 1Somatic mutations
detected in tumorVariant IDVartypeGeneConsequenceCoding changeDepth tumorAF tumorDepth normalchr1_200567369_G_Asnv KIF14
missense_variantp.H849Y2250.22799chr1_235909689_G_GCCINdel LYST
frameshift_variant&feature_elongationp.A2640fs5750.177255chr1_43239249_C_Tsnv C1orf50 stop_gainedp.R71X3300.352296chr10_124897147_G_Tsnv
HMX3 missense_variantp.G325V2520.286189chr10_48388199_C_Tsnv RBP3 missense_variantp.M893I2530.229149chr12_31238059_A_Gsnv DDX11
missense_variantp.R213G320.18816chr14_57858330_G_Asnv NAA30 missense_variantp.E219K1650.21294chr14_57858331_A_Tsnv NAA30
missense_variantp.E219V1650.21894chr17_28887148_T_Asnv TBC1D29 missense_variantp.L9Q1400.0589chr17_7256853_G_Asnv KCTD11
missense_variantp.E198K1670.192132chr18_14542791_C_Tsnv POTEC missense_variantp.A119T840.08347chr19_35842950_G_Asnv FFAR1
missense_variantp.G166S5640.278358chr2_202492837_T_Asnv TMEM237 missense_variantp.N302I1910.21590chr20_23065590_C_Gsnv CD93
missense_variantp.G414R4100.21230chr21_45535623_C_Asnv PWP2 missense_variantp.P220T1300.20896chr3_108348015_A_Gsnv DZIP3
missense_variantp.T230A1140.27245chr4_110885598_C_Tsnv EGF stop_gainedp.R494X4020.274260chr4_155298451_T_Asnv DCHS2
missense_variantp.E127V2250.164113chr5_178771091_C_Asnv ADAMTS2 missense_variantp.V71L3330.258194chr5_65105904_TC_TinDEL NLN
frameshift_variant&feature_truncationp.Q586fs3330.168200chr6_136589425_G_Tsnv BCLAF1 missense_variantp.P758T1230.08935chr6_33406615_C_Gsnv
SYNGAP1 missense_variantp.T532R3450.22241chr6_91271355_C_Asnv MAP3K7 missense_variantp.G110V5580.246305chr7_143096972_G_Tsnv EPHA1
missense_variantp.R203S2220.212153chr9_139571036_C_Tsnv AGPAT2 splice_donor_variantexon5:c.588 + 1G > A830.337103 snv single nucleotide
variant; INdel insertion of the deletion of the bases Somatic mutations detected in tumor snv single nucleotide variant; INdel insertion of
the deletion of the bases A plot of normalized transcript counts is shown in Fig. 3a. In order to estimate upregulation of transcription
compared to a normal kidney, we obtained transcript counts from the RNA-Seq Atlas (Fig. 3b). In order to evaluate whether there was an
expression effect of TFEB being overexpressed, we examined whether genes that previously had been reported as upregulated in transiently
TFEB-overexpressed HeLa cells were also affected in the tumor (Fig. 3a, TFEB curve). A marked curve shift towards higher transcript levels,
compared to the full list of genes, was observed, indicating that the high TFEB level observed in the tumor also increased expression of the
reported target genes. We also examined whether a previously reported gene set for coordinated lysosomal expression and regulation (CLEAR)
was upregulated in the tumor, and this could also be observed. Moreover, TFEB expression is very high in the tumor, compared to TFEB
expression levels observed otherwise in normal kidney tissues [20, 21].Fig. 3Density plots showing the distributions of ribonucleic acid
expression levels for all genes detected in the tumor (black curve; a) and the RNA-Seq Atlas (b). Two subsets of genes are also shown: the
blue curve demonstrates the genes previously reported to be induced in cells where transcription factor EB is transiently overexpressed, and
the red curve illustrates the coordinated lysosomal expression and regulation motif (GTCACGTGAC) which overlaps the E-box motif (CANNTG) to
which transcription factor EB also binds. The x-values represent the log 2 values of fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped
reads. Also shown are specific expression levels for genes discussed in the text. PMEL was not found in the RNA-Seq Atlas. The y-values for
these genes bear no meaning, other than to avoid overlap of names Density plots showing the distributions of ribonucleic acid expression
levels for all genes detected in the tumor (black curve; a) and the RNA-Seq Atlas (b). Two subsets of genes are also shown: the blue curve
demonstrates the genes previously reported to be induced in cells where transcription factor EB is transiently overexpressed, and the red
curve illustrates the coordinated lysosomal expression and regulation motif (GTCACGTGAC) which overlaps the E-box motif (CANNTG) to which
transcription factor EB also binds. The x-values represent the log 2 values of fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped
reads. Also shown are specific expression levels for genes discussed in the text. PMEL was not found in the RNA-Seq Atlas. The y-values for
these genes bear no meaning, other than to avoid overlap of names The transcriptional profile confirmed the clinical suspicion of highly
upregulated macro-autophagy and dysfunctional pathway activity in c-MET, MAPK, TSC2 and S100A9, and downregulation of mTOR, as previously
reported relevant for this type of tumor (Fig. 3). Treatment with an autophagy-inhibiting agent, hydrochloroquine 200 mg twice a day, was
therefore started and subsequently increased to 400 mg twice a day, but stopped when progression was observed in July 2014. Unfortunately, 5
months after the start of pazopanib, the CT and MRI evaluation confirmed progression, and the treatment was switched to another broad-acting
TKI, sunitinib dose 37.5 mg per day, as third-line therapy. In the wake of the genetic results and the approval of checkpoint inhibitor
therapy, a second course of palliative radiotherapy was planned in late July 2014 (see Fig. 4).Fig. 4The course of treatment The course of
treatment The second biopsy results gained from DNA pointed to enhanced autophagy gene signature and MAPK and AKT pathways downstream. On
histological examination, cathepsin K and Melan-A were highly positive. Due to local pain in the patient’s chest wall, a second course of
three-dimensional CT conformal radiotherapy encompassing pleural metastases (3 Gy per fraction, 5 days per week) was planned 4 weeks later,
and sunitinib treatment was halted prior to radiotherapy. Acute pleural bleeding confirmed with a CT scan showed tumor growth after 8
fractions of radiotherapy, and further irradiation was abolished. Sunitinib treatment was discontinued. In view of the young age of the
patient and the specific staining for Melan-A expressing tumor cells (Fig. 5), he was finally accepted for ipilimumab, targeting CTLA-4,
activating the immune system, combined with third-line sorafenib treatment, a kinase inhibitor used in the treatment of renal cancer.
Ipilimumab was withdrawn rapidly, due to controversies around combined treatment in the physicians group, exaggerated by temporary health
deterioration of the patient. At last follow-up, 16 months after the diagnosis of translocational RCC, the patient’s sorafenib treatment
stopped due to disease progression and he died shortly afterwards.Fig. 5 a Primary tumor with positive Melan-A staining. b Metastasis with
positive Melan-A staining a Primary tumor with positive Melan-A staining. b Metastasis with positive Melan-A staining Attempts of cell
culture of excess cell material from the bone biopsy in medium were unsuccessful. A subclass of renal tumors, translocation renal tumors,
involves somatic translocations of transcription factors that are members of the MITF family, essentially deregulating gene expression
control. Translocations involving the TFEB are less common than transcription factor E3 (TFE3), with only 30 confirmed cases reported in the
literature . Here we describe the therapeutic despair which comes along when treating such a fatal cancer, and an attempt to apply molecular
guidance for treatment of this disease. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first such study of the clinical course of TFEB RCC combined
with genetic elucidation in a young man with metastatic disease. There is a paucity of comprehensive reports on the clinicogenetic findings
in translocation-driven RCC, but recently the clinicopathological manifestations in TFEB have been acknowledged, contributing to the correct
diagnosis . The sequencing-based approaches added some important clues to the understanding of this entity in our patient, primarily from
expression profiling, as a few mutations that can potentially serve as a drug target could be identified. The main finding in our case was
the upregulated activity in autophagy. Dysfunctional autophagy activity guided us in our search for interpretation of the results showing
activity in genes and transcript expression in self-destruction [24, 25]. The TFEB gene mutation correlated clinically with proliferation
and invasion of bony structures, liver and pleural manifestations. The tumor exhibited an extremely aggressive clinical behavior during
radiotherapy and was non-responsive to mTOR inhibitor, and moreover showed only modest response to a variety of medical interventions and
TKIs. In addition, patients with von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) syndrome can develop clear cell RCC and a subgroup of such patients may have
similarities with those described in the transcriptome of our study . The role of MITF family transcription factors in renal cell
transformation to mutant cancer cell has yet to be elucidated in depth. However, the transcription of TFEB is acknowledged as the master
regulator of the mTOR nutrients sensing machinery, in a hypoxia-inducible transcription factor (HIF) independent manner . The intriguing
overlap between the more common phenotype of RCC to translocation-driven RCC constitutes the metabolic disarrangement leading to
dysfunctional activity in these cells and, as we propose in our case, to uncontrolled autophagy. In our data, the TFEB driver mutation
favored enhanced osteoclast activity, and upregulated cathepsin K was confirmed in several biopsies, and promoting a gene signature
connected to MAPK and c-MET signal pathways. It is known that TFEB, the master regulator of lysosome biogenesis, controls transcription of
target genes closely related to lysosomal structure and function, including hydrolases. Our findings in the DNA motif demonstrated
upregulation of genes previously reported to be induced in cells where TFEB was overexpressed. The same signature overlapped with the CLEAR
motif in RNA samples. Tsuda et al. showed recently that mTORC1 is a key upstream kinase that directly phosphorylates TFEB and inhibits its
activity . In addition, nuclear TFEB translocation may re-establish autophagy, enforcing metabolic activity in cancer cells normally seen in
periods of starvation conducted by the autophagy program. Again, the gene signature showed increased expression of autophagy-related genes,
supporting our assumption. Second, in our search for involved signaling pathways and oncologic drivers, we found that c-MET RNA was
increased in our obtained biopsies. Our patient had bone lesions early in the course of his metastatic disease, which is in line with the
c-MET hyperactivity seen in germline mutations of hereditary papillary RCC and bone metastases of RCC. Moreover, patients with upregulation
of lysosomes in osteoclasts might benefit from c-MET inhibitors, such as cabozantinib, where the c-MET signal pathway is stimulated by TFEB
to trigger lysosomal acidification and degradation of the extracellular bone microenvironment supporting the activity of osteoclasts . In
our case, the metastasis stemmed from the rib, and the first signs of disseminated spread were localized to the spine. We tried to
counteract the possibility of tumor-related autophagy with hydrochloroquine. This was an unproven experimental off-label approach, but has
been tried in other solid tumors before. Unfortunately, we did not have access to c-MET inhibitors, which would have been a more targeted
attempt supported by the gene expression findings from the biopsies. Some interesting similarities, but also striking differences, to clear
cell RCC were seen. In clear cell RCC, mutations in the VHL gene lead to upregulation of mTOR and glycolysis. In TFEB RCC, mechanisms
different from aerobic glycolysis may be active. One possible major difference is the involvement of c-MYC, which has been linked to HIF-1
metabolism and glutaminolysis . One other interesting feature in our patient with autophagy addiction points to the use of the amino acid
arginine, and an increased arginase activity was seen, which also could be clinically exploited. The often related metabolic shift in energy
rescue seen in clear cell RCC was not apparent in our case. This may have consequences for imaging, in that 18F-FDG PET may not be suitable
to detect disease activity. Previously, baseline high 18F-FDG PET uptake and increased number of positive lesions have been associated with
prognostic information in patients receiving sunitinib . As seen in our patient, the hybrid PET/CT combined with 18F-FDG or 18F-FACBC as
radiotracers could not convey valuable information about the location or activity of metastases. However, the possible addiction for
glutamine and/or arginine and possible dysfunctional metabolism should be tested with novel amino acid radiotracers in these patients. In
the wake of specific TFEB RCC radiotracers, it seems that the first choice of standard radiological diagnosis in this tumor is MRI. MRI
assessment conceived bone and soft tissue lesions and was reliable to address the efficacy of target therapy. The clinical features with
initially osteolytic bony lesions in our patient, together with the recognized autophagic genetic fingerprint supervised our therapeutic
approach, representing a first step into precision medicine for this patient group. The efficacy of TKIs and mTOR inhibitors appears limited
in translocational RCC. Treatment duration in those patients may last when intrinsic patterns of resistance to a particular agent could be
obtained. To do so, serial biopsies of metastatic lesions were sampled in our patient. We found a clear molecular link to activated
autophagy and osteoclast enhancement, but poor response to existing targeted therapy. Of note, a possible durable effect by ipilimumab in
combination with a TKI presumably stimulating the immune system and this observation deserves further investigation. Despite the limited
therapeutic benefits achieved in our case, clarifying the essential genetic make-up may portend the future treatment in this rare disease.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for research purposes when he was still alive. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Additional file 1: Reference data DNA/RNA analysis and individual pipeline
steps DNA/RNA (DOCX 22 kb) Reference data DNA/RNA analysis and individual pipeline steps DNA/RNA (DOCX 22 kb) Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions EH, LM and WL analyzed and interpreted the patient data
regarding the neoplasm and were major contributors to the manuscript. LV performed the histological examination of the kidney, and MR
contributed in interpreting the nuclear medicine findings and in writing the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Courtesy to the radiologist Knut Hole who helped with the MR imaging.
