Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is a rare malignant tumor that might occur in nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. It is characteristic for
poor prognosis, especially the solid histopathological subtype of the tumor. ACC might spread along nerves and fascias and it is usually
diagnosed at advanced stage. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging together with fine-needle biopsy are the gold standards in
the diagnostic procedure of the cancer. Surgery with adjuvant therapy are the most common methods of treatment. Among the surgical
approaches, the functional endonasal sinus surgery seems to be the most appropriate and favorable way of treatment. In the study, the
authors present a case of a 62-year-old patient with T4aN0M0 ACC tumor treated endoscopically at the Department of Laryngology and ENT
Oncology, WSS No. 5 in Sosnowiec. The authors indicate the usefulness of FESS procedure in the treatment of malignancies of nasal cavity and
paranasal sinuses. They also review the recent publications on endonasal versus open approach in similar cases. In conclusions, the authors
favor endonasal approach as a mini-invasive method of surgical treatment of ACC of paranasal sinuses that results in satisfactory
oncological outcome and high quality of patient’s life. Adenoid cystic carcinomas (ACC) are rare malignant tumors that usually affect
salivary glands . They comprise about 1 % malignancies of all head and neck cancers and about 6–10 % of malignant salivary gland tumors .
The most common localization for ACC is submandibular gland (15–30 %) or minor salivary glands (30 %). Involvement of nasal cavity is rare.
It is much more common for maxillary sinus. ACC was first described by French scientists—Robin, Lorain and Laboulbène in 1853 and 1854 .
Head and neck adenoid cystic carcinoma is characteristic for spread along the nerves, high propensity for recurrence and distant metastases,
which are often found when the first symptoms are observed . It may invade the adjacent skull base by bone lysis and/or by perinervous and
perivascular spread within the skull base foramina . Advanced T stage reflects a poor prognosis for patients and 10-year survival is very
low [1, 8]. It has been found that the histological subtype of a tumor, among which we can mention: tubular, cribriform, solid or mixed
type, also influences the prognosis, giving advantage to solid subtype as the most malignant one [9, 10]. Also, some recent studies have
showed that expression of c-Kit mutations is associated with a significantly poorer prognosis, while EGFR expression gives better 3-year
survival . The main symptoms include unilateral deformation of the nose, unilateral nasal obstruction, pain and recurrent epistaxis.
Horner’s syndrome and unilateral sero-mucous otitis have been also reported . Diagnosis covers ENT examination, computed tomography and
obligatorily preoperative tumor biopsy. MRI scans might help in assessment of tumor extension . Surgical treatment, alternatively followed
by conventional or neutron irradiation, remains the optimal therapy . Yet, the benefit of adjuvant radiotherapy has never been proved in
randomized studies [12, 13]. Recently, the application of photodynamic therapy as adjuvant therapy to surgery in recurrent malignant tumors
of the paranasal sinuses has been introduced . As far as proton therapy is concerned, it should be reserved for tumors with extensions to
sphenoid bone or clivus and chemotherapy for palliative treatment [2, 15]. Until, the endoscopic era lateral rhinotomy with tumor resection
seemed to be the best solution. However, it is authors’ firm belief that endonasal approach can be similarly effective, resulting in
complete removal with tumor-free surgical margins. The aim of the study is to present the usefulness and radicality of FESS (functional
endonasal sinus surgery) procedure as a minimally invasive one at the resection of a malignant tumor of the nasal cavity and paranasal
sinuses with bone destruction. The authors report a case of a 62-year-old woman who was admitted to the Department of Neurosurgery. The
patient presented with epistaxis for about 2 months, as well as nasal obstruction. Neither severe pain, nor nose deformation was reported.
Anterior rhinoscopy showed the presence of tumor masses in the right nostril. Therefore, a computed tomography (CT) of paranasal sinuses was
performed. The examination proved the presence of expansive masses in the ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses as well as nasal cavities without
infiltration of the anterior cranial fossa (Fig. 1). The biopsy revealed adenoid cystic carcinoma.Fig. 1Computed tomography of paranasal
sinuses. Axial projection. Hipodensive masses in the posterior ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses with expansion to nasal cavities. Partially
pneumatised ethmoid cells are visible Computed tomography of paranasal sinuses. Axial projection. Hipodensive masses in the posterior
ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses with expansion to nasal cavities. Partially pneumatised ethmoid cells are visible On admission to the
Department the patient was alert, logically responding, with no signs of neurological deficiencies. The patient did not suffer from blurred
vision or diplopia. No allergies have been reported. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed to evaluate the expansion of the tumor
(Fig. 2). The TNM staging was estimated as T4aN0M0.Fig. 2Magnetic resonance imaging. Coronal projection. Tumor masses in the right nasal
cavity and bilaterally ethmoid sinuses. The arrows indicate ethmoids in inflammatory state, separating the tumor from anterior cranial fossa
Magnetic resonance imaging. Coronal projection. Tumor masses in the right nasal cavity and bilaterally ethmoid sinuses. The arrows indicate
ethmoids in inflammatory state, separating the tumor from anterior cranial fossa Minor leukocytemia (WBC 12.08 × 103/μl) and anemia (RBC
2.78 × 106/μl, HGB 9.2 g/dl, HCT 27.8 %) was reported. Other laboratory tests appeared to be normal. FESS procedure in a team of
neurosurgeon and ENT surgeon was performed under general anesthesia, i.e., TIVA (total intravenous anesthesia). Macroscopically a non-
homogenic, cohesive, pink tumor was found. All the standard steps performed at FESS, such as uncinectomy, ethmoidectomy, sphenoidectomy,
were difficult to be precisely differentiated due to massive tumor that destroyed the anatomical landmarks of this region. The operation was
introduced with the resection of the central parts of the tumor masses (debulking) together with infiltrated nasal septum and frontal wall
of the sphenoid sinus. This maneuver enabled identification of the probable starting point of the neoplasm, namely posterior part of nasal
septum, i.e., sphenoid rostrum. Partially the margins of a tumor were visualized—tumor masses in the region of the ethmoid roof, sella
turcica, clivus and left ethmoids bordered tissues free of cancerous cells. The right posterior ethmoids and lamina papyracea of the right
orbit were more challenging in terms of defining exact margins of the tumor. Therefore, resection of all structures of this region, leaving
bare bone of the right lamina papyracea was performed (Fig. 3). The bone itself seemed to remain unaltered. The surgeons encountered no
difficulties in identification of ethmoid roof, left middle turbinate, sella turcica and other landmarks after initial debulking. No severe
bleeding was noted. A dressing composed of Merocell was applicated to the nasal cavity for 48 h postoperatively. The histopathological
examination revealed adenoid cystic carcinoma.Fig. 3Intraoperative image after the resection of a tumor Intraoperative image after the
resection of a tumor Postoperative period was uneventful. CT scans performed after the operation showed radical resection of tumor masses
(Fig. 4).Fig. 4CT. Axial projection. State after radical resection of tumor masses—lack of the right superior and medial turbinate, medial
wall of the right maxillary sinus, frontal walls of the sphenoid sinuses. Bare bone of the posterior part of the medial orbital wall, as
mentioned in the text. The ethmoids that were well pneumatized before the surgical procedure are now filled with postoperative edematous
tissues CT. Axial projection. State after radical resection of tumor masses—lack of the right superior and medial turbinate, medial wall of
the right maxillary sinus, frontal walls of the sphenoid sinuses. Bare bone of the posterior part of the medial orbital wall, as mentioned
in the text. The ethmoids that were well pneumatized before the surgical procedure are now filled with postoperative edematous tissues The
patient was referred to an oncological department, where an adjuvant radiotherapy of total dose of 60 Gy was evaluated. At a 2-month follow-
up visit, no recurrent masses of a tumor were observed in CT (Fig. 4). The patient is regularly controlled at the outpatient clinic and in
the oncological center. Lack of publications on endonasal removal of an ACC of paranasal sinuses itself causes problems in thorough
discussion of the mentioned topic. Most authors present general statistics on various malignant tumors treated with FESS, and few of them
compare the results with open surgical approaches. Some publications refer exclusively to esthesioneuroblastoma or melanoma of paranasal
sinuses [20, 21]. The largest US database of patients (120 cases) with malignant tumors of the sinonasal tract treated with endoscopic or
endoscopic-assisted resection has been reported by Hanna et al. . Nevertheless, it seems that endoscopic resection of malignant tumors
localized in nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses has been a matter of many controversies for the last several years . Many authors believe
that endoscopic sinus surgery is an effective method for sinonasal malignancies resection . They indicate that it provides a satisfactory
survival rate with few side effects and better quality of life. In addition to excellent visualization, endoscopic approaches eliminate or
significantly reduce the need for craniofacial soft-tissue dissection, skeletal disassembly, and brain retraction for tumor access and
resection . Considering the fact that by performing FESS we avoid extensive scar that results in better esthetic effect and patient’s
satisfaction, endonasal approach might be very tempting. Among open approaches Weber-Ferguson facial incision, midface degloving,
craniotomy, Lynch procedure and Caldwell-Luc procedure should be mentioned [26, 27]. It is worth emphasizing that malignant character of a
tumor, advanced stage of the disease leading to cachexia often deteriorates the wound healing after open surgery, sometimes resulting in
nasocutaneous fistulas . Such situation may extremely decrease patient’s quality of life. Also, Suh et al. claim that open surgical
technique is burdened with higher risk of intra- and postoperative blood loss and higher rate of morbidity in comparison to endoscopic
approach . Endonasal endoscopic approach might be similarly to laryngological field beneficial in some neurosurgical operations . For
instance, Jouanneau et al. claim that the endonasal route represents an interesting alternative approach to Meckel’s cave as well as the
cavernous sinus . Also, according to Berhouma et al. endonasal endoscopic skull base surgery (EESBS) was initially dedicated for
transsphenoid resection of pituitary adenomas , while nowadays it offers much more opportunities, including the treatment of clival
pathologies . However, some authors do not favor EESBS in the resection of malignant skull base tumors, emphasizing that such approach
should be limited to certain cases [34, 35]. Most scientists state that the endonasal method is reserved for experienced surgeons and that
the possibility of its application depends on TNM staging . According to Hanna et al., the endoscopically treated tumors were usually of
lower stage, i.e., T1–T2 . They emphasize the necessity of co-operation between ENT surgeon and neurosurgeon . They also focus on the role
of proper adjuvant therapy, especially intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT). However, it is the matter of tumor-free margins that
stimulates the greatest discussion upon endoscopic approach in the malignant tumor resection. Therefore, some authors claim that the only
way to obtain above state is an open surgery with intraoperative biopsies. Yet, Sur et al. suggest that the extension of the surgical
resection does not affect the overall survival. The authors believe that endoscopic approach enables perfect visualization of a tumor and
its borders, leading to radical resection of a tumor. In the described case tumor tissue differed from the normal mucosa to such extend that
macroscopically the surgical margins seemed to be free of a tumor with high certainty. According to Stammberger, the limitations of
endoscopic technique result from the anatomical spread of the tumor, when extensive infiltration of orbit, dura/brain and other vital
structures exist . The key anatomical structures include internal carotid artery, optic nerve, cavernous sinuses, ethmoid roof . Expansion
of the tumor onto one or both cavernous sinuses is associated with the risk of injury to one of the ocular motor nerves (nerves III, IV and
VI) crossing the sinus. The risk is particularly high in the case of the abducens nerve as, contrary to nerves III and IV located in the
lateral wall of the cavernous sinus, this nerve passes through the sinus lumen. During endoscopic procedures in a similar way like in the
open brain surgeries, ocular motor nerves can be identified by means of neurophysiological monitoring which protects them against an
iatrogenic injury . Nevertheless, surgical treatment of sinonasal malignancies with skull base expansion might lead to vision loss or
temporary diplopia due to edema of the medial rectus muscle . It is also worth mentioning that in comparison to open surgery, such as
lateral rhinotomy, the dressing used after FESS is much less uncomfortable for a patient, regardless the material used (Merocell, Merogel,
Nasoporin, etc.). Moreover, it is applied only for 48 h and in case of absorbable dressing, there is no need of its slightly painful removal
from nostrils at all. Also, the length of hospital stay in case of endoscopic technique is shorter and the recovery is faster [37, 39]. Of
course the described method does not remain without limitations and disadvantages, among which we should mention cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
leak, especially in cases with tumor extension to the skull base cavities. It seems that very little space in the described anatomical
region multiplies the difficulties of dural reconstruction . However, in the era of fascial or mucosal grafts in combination with tissue
sealants, specialized instrumentation (curved needles, self-tying suture) an adequate reconstruction for most small defects might be
obtained . It has been reported that pedicled nasoseptal flaps, first introduced by Hadad in 2006 , reduced postoperative CSF leaks rates
from 20 % to around 4 % [41, 42]. In the described case, no CSF leak was reported. Other complications may include meningitis, epiphora in
the course of dacryocystitis, mild brain contusion or pneumocephalus . None of teh above was observed in our patient. A systemic review of
the recent publications on limits of endonasal endoscopic surgery in case of sinonasal tumors expanding to skull base region has been
presented by Solares et al. . The aspects raised in the study were: anatomical restrictions on surgical access (mentioned above), technical
challenges such as dural reconstruction and hemostasis . The authors are aware of the fact that the assessment of survival rate is
inappropriate in such short period of time in above case, however, the aim of study was to emphasize the usefulness of FESS procedure in
mini-invasive removal of paranasal sinuses’ malignancies. To sum up, the authors, who are experienced in both methods, believe that
endoscopic approach in the treatment of ACC of nasal and paranasal sinuses remains an effective mini-invasive method that in well-selected
patients, together with adjuvant therapies, can be satisfactorily applied, giving good results, complete removal of a tumor and high
surviving rate. At the same time they emphasize the necessity of meticulous qualification to endonasal endoscopic surgeries, co-operation of
ENT and neurosurgeon and the importance of application of novel technological facilities, such as neurophysiological monitoring. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. adenoid cystic carcinoma
cerebrospinal fluid computed tomography endonasal endoscopic skull base surgery functional endonasal sinus surgery intensity-modulated
radiation therapy magnetic resonance imaging total intravenosus anesthesia PW operator, ENT surgeon, made substantial contributions to
conception and design of the report, participated in data collection, was involved in drafting and revision of the manuscript, MT operator,
neurosurgeon, participated in data collection; APS participated in the design of the study, collected data, drafted the manuscript; WK
revised the manuscript for important intellectual content, AŚK participated in the design of the study, revised the manuscript, JM revised
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
