Lipoid proteinosis is a rare autosomal recessive genodermatosis with abnormal lipid protein complexes deposition in different parts of the
body, especially in the skin and mucus membranes of the upper aerodigestive tract. Though ocular involvement in lipoid proteinosis is rare,
ophthalmologists may encounter diverse ocular complications accompanying this syndrome in clinical practice. We describe a case of lipoid
proteinosis involving bilateral eyelids with pathognomonic moniliform blepharosis in a 33-year-old gentleman who presented with the
complaints of itching of eye lids on and off since 10 years. Lipoid proteinosis, also known as Urbach–Wiethe syndrome or hyalinosis cutis et
mucosae, first described by a dermatologist Urbach and an otolaryngologist Wiethe in 1929. It is a rare autosomal recessive multisystem
disorder with dermatological, otorhinolaryngological, ocular, and neurological manifestations due to mutation of extracellular-matrix
protein-1 gene located on chromosome 1q21. It is characterized by the deposition of an amorphous hyaline material with a glycoprotein
constitution in various tissues in the body mainly the larynx, skin, and tongue. Though this entity has been well known to dermatologists
and otorhinolaryngologists, few reports have appeared in the ophthalmic literature with the eyelids involvement in the majority of the
cases. We describe a case of lipoid proteinosis involving bilateral eyelids with pathognomonic moniliform blepharosis in a 33-year-old
gentleman who presented with the complaints of itching of eyelids on and off since 10 years. This study conforms to the principles outlined
in the Declaration of Helsinki and was conducted after obtaining approval from the Institutional Ethics Committee on Human Research and
informed written consent from the patient. A 33-year-old gentleman presented to our outpatient department with complaints of itching of
eyelids in both eyes on and off since 10 years. On ophthalmic examination, unaided visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes, anterior segment
examination revealed rows of yellow-white color, round or oval, bead-like excrescences on the margins of all four lids and the caruncle,
resembling a string of pearls, the pathognomonic, moniliform blepharosis [Figs. 1 and 2]. The lesions were continuous, overlying the entire
lid margin and obscuring the details of the lid margin with thickening of the free ends of the lids considerably. Rest of the anterior
segment examination was otherwise normal including intraocular pressure measurement. Fundus evaluation of both eyes was within normal
limits. Systemic examination revealed thickened and hard tongue with teeth indentations [Fig. 3], hoarseness of voice, multiple small
yellow-colored soft and partially translucent nodules over the skin in bilateral axilla [Fig. 4], and normal neurological and psychiatric
evaluation. Otorhynolaryngologist's evaluation for hoarseness of voice showed thickening and irregularities of the vocal cords’ mucosa on
laryngoscopy. Similar clinical features including pathognomonic moniliform blepharosis and hoarseness of voice were noted in his sibling who
was asymptomatic. Baseline laboratory data including biochemical and hematological parameters were within normal limits. Biopsy of the
axillary skin lesions performed by a dermatologist was consistent with the histopathological diagnosis of lipoid proteinosis. The patient
has been managed with artificial tear supplements and antihistamine eye drops with the symptomatic improvement of ocular manifestations
within 4 weeks’ time. He has been further advised and counseled regarding the chronic nature of the disease, other ocular manifestations,
multisystem involvement, and the need for follow-up under a multidisciplinary team of specialists including ophthalmologist, dentist,
dermatologist, otorhynolaryngologist, and neurologist. Lipoid proteinosis involving eyelids Lipoid proteinosis involving eyelids showing
pathognomonic moniliform blepharosis Lipoid proteinosis involving oral mucosa and tongue Lipoid proteinosis involving axillary skin Lipoid
proteinosis usually starts in infancy or early childhood due to the involvement of upper aerodigestive tract mucosa with hoarseness of voice
as presenting feature, may be accompanied by swelling of the tongue and lips, with associated difficulty in swallowing and respiratory
distress in some cases. Next, in sequence occurs a skin rash, involving the face, scalp, and trunk with a thickened, pale yellow-brown, pock
marked appearance of the lesions. It may also involve axilla as seen in our case or the extensor surfaces (elbows and knees) with marked
hyperkeratosis in response to minor trauma. Neurological manifestations include longstanding memory impairment, paranoia, rage attacks,
mental retardation, and temporal lobe epilepsy. Though ocular manifestations in lipoid proteinosis are rare, they were described since early
descriptions of the disease. Along with moniliform blepharosis as a pathognomonic feature of the disease as seen in our case, an
ophthalmologist may encounter other manifestations of lipoid proteinosis in any part of the eye such as cornea, conjunctiva, sclera,
trabecular meshwork, iris/pupil, lens and zonular fibers, retina, and nasolacrimal duct. In general, the most common ocular lesions include
eyelid lesions, as mentioned before; classic presentation of such lesions is called moniliform blepharosis, which is generally believed to
be one of the most pathognomonic features of lipoid proteinosis. This hallmark presents as tiny papules on eyelid margins such as a string
of yellowish and waxy beads [Figs. 1 and 2] as seen in our case and is particularly known as a strong diagnostic clue. Apart from the
diagnostic value, lid lesions are reported to accompany infiltration of glands of Zeiss, Moll, and Meibomian and consequently cause
madarosis, trichiasis, and sometimes distichiasis. Another frequent finding is focal degeneration of macula and drusen formation in Bruch's
membrane in about 30–50% patients. Uncommon ocular manifestations of lipoid proteinosis include glaucoma (either due to deposition of
hyaline inclusions in the trabecular meshwork or due to hyalinization of scleral trabeculum with deposition of glycoproteins), lens-related
complications (cataract or lens dislocation or subluxation), retinal complications (the concomitancy of retinitis pigmentosa, impaired color
vision, and light hypersensitivity), corneal manifestations (corneal ulceration caused by trichiasis, corneal opacities, keratoconus as well
as the deposition of hyaline on the cornea, especially at Descemet's membrane), iris- and pupil-related complications, unilateral or
bilateral uveitis, dry eye or epiphora, nasolacrimal duct obstruction, and transient blindness. As lipoid proteinosis runs a chronic, benign
but progressive course, no effective treatment is known. In most of the cases, management is guided toward the type of ocular manifestation
with symptomatic improvement in clinical condition. As in our case, eyelid lesions are managed with artificial tear supplements and
antihistamine eye drops and may involve surgical removal and CO2 laser therapy in some cases. Patients have been further advised and
counseled regarding the chronic nature of the disease, diverse ocular manifestations, multisystem involvement, and the need for follow-up
under a multidisciplinary team of specialists including ophthalmologist, dentist, dermatologist, otorhynolaryngologist, and neurologist.
Though ocular manifestations in lipoid proteinosis are rare, ophthalmologists may encounter diverse ocular complications as mentioned above,
leading them for a more effective role in diagnosing and managing individuals with this disease as a part of a multidisciplinary team of
physicians. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
