A 59-year-old Asian Indian male presented with complaints of left eye blurring of vision associated with on and off episodes eye pain and
redness since last 4 months. On examination, his best corrected visual acuity in the right eye was 6/15, N12 and left eye counting finger at
2 m, < N36. Anterior segment examination of the left eye revealed circumciliary congestion, corneal edema, mutton fat pigmented keratic
precipitates, and dilated pupil with complicated cataract [Fig. 1a and b]. Intraocular pressure (IOP) in the right eye was 18 and left eye
48 mmHg. On the basis of history and clinical examination, a probable diagnosis of viral anterior granulomatous keratouveitis was made. The
patient was started on topical prednisolone, homatropine, and empirical tablet acyclovir. Patient was also advised tablet. Acetazolamide,
topical antiglaucoma medications (timolol and brinzolamide) in left eye to control IOP. Anterior chamber tap was done in left eye for real
time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for herpes simplex virus (HSV). RT-PCR report was positive for HSV [Fig. 2a and b]. The patient was
started with T. valacyclovir 1 g 3 times and tapering dose of topical prednisolone. The patient is on follow-up and responding well to the
treatment. Anterior segment photograph of the left eye showing large, pigmented keratic precipitates suggestive of granulomatous anterior
uveitis in diffuse (white arrow) (a) and slit lamp illumination (white arrow) (b) (a) Real time polymerase chain reaction report showing
exponential rise in viral DNA copies suggestive of active replication of herpes simplex I virus (blue arrow) along with positive control
(red arrow) and (b) real time polymerase chain reaction report showing exponential rise of positive control only (yellow arrow) and not of
herpes simplex II virus Human herpes virus affects various ocular tissues and is known to cause anterior and/or posterior uveitis. Uveitis
in HSV ocular disease is usually associated with corneal stromal disease and often unilateral in nature. Herpetic anterior uveitis is
characterized by keratic precipitates, which can be of several forms such as fine diffuse, granulomatous, and nongranulomatous in
appearance. It is often associated with iris atrophy, raised IOP, and dilated pupil in the absence of dilatation drops. Secondary glaucoma
is also a common complication associated with herpetic uveitis. PCR increases specificity and sensitivity of the detection of etiological
agent from ocular fluids in a clinically suspected cases of herpetic uveitis and improves outcome of these diseases. RT-PCR is a quick
method for quantitative measurements of the viral load in RT, thus enabling detection of active replication of viruses. Nil. There are no
conflicts of interest.
