The purpose of this video is to present the laparoscopic repair of a VUF in a 42-year-old woman, with gross hematuria, in the immediate
postoperative phase following a cesarean delivery. The obstetric team implemented conservative management, including Foley catheter
insertion, for 2 weeks. She subsequently developed intermittent hematuria and cystitis. The urology team was consulted 15 days after
cesarean delivery. Cystoscopy indicated an ulcerated lesion in the bladder dome of approximately 1.0cm in size. Hysterosalpingography and a
pelvic computed tomography scan indicated a fistula. Laparoscopic repair was performed 30 days after the cesarean delivery. The patient was
placed in the lithotomy position while also in an extreme Trendelenburg position. Pneumoperitoneum was established using a Veress needle in
the midline infra-umbilical region, and a primary 11-mm port was inserted. Another 11-mm port was inserted exactly between the left superior
iliac spine and the umbilicus. Two other 5-mm ports were established under laparoscopic guidance in the iliac fossa on both sides. The
omental adhesions in the pelvis were carefully released and the peritoneum between the bladder and uterus was incised via cautery. Limited
cystotomy was performed, and the specific sites of the fistula and the ureteral meatus were identified; thereafter, the posterior bladder
wall was adequately mobilized away from the uterus. The uterine rent was then closed using single 3/0Vicryl sutures and two-layer watertight
closure of the urinary bladder was achieved by using 3/0Vicryl sutures. An omental flap was mobilized and inserted between the uterus and
the urinary bladder, and was fixed using two 3/0Vicryl sutures, followed by tube drain insertion. The operative time was 140 min, whereas
the blood loss was 100ml. The patient was discharged 3 days after surgery, and the catheter was removed 12 days after surgery. Laparoscopy
has advantages over open surgery in that it is associated with less pain, shorter length of hospital stay, better cosmesis, quicker
recovery, and equal efficacy. Although cases of VUF are rarely noted, the laparoscopic skill obtained through other urological procedures
suggest, that laparoscopic repair may be the procedure of choice for such cases (2). The reported operative time for the laparoscopic repair
of VUF in the literature varies between 140 and 220 min (3). However, laparoscopic techniques should be considered as a mode of abdominal
access and should not influence the method of surgical repair. Surgical success should depend on the adherence to good technique rather than
the approach. Hence, this method appears to be a viable alternative for surgeons experienced with laparoscopic suturing techniques.
Laparoscopic repair appears to be a viable alternative for surgeons experienced with laparoscopic suturing techniques. Vesicouterine
fistulae (VUF) comprise 2-9% of all cases of urogenital fistulae. Only 5% of patients respond to conservative management, whereas other
patients require definitive surgical repair (1). Although laparoscopy provides better visualization through magnification, this technique is
difficult to learn. We hypothesized that the experience gained through other pelvic laparoscopic procedures, such as ureteral re-
implantation, correction of vesicovaginal fistulae, and radical prostatectomy, may enhance the ability of urologists to perform this
procedure with traditional laparoscopic intracorporeal suturing, without the need for any special tools. ARTICLE INFO Available at:
http://www.brazjurol.com.br/videos/september_october_2015/Maioli_1030_1031video.htm Int Braz J urol. 2015; 41 (video #8): 1030-1 This video
nicely depicts the laparoscopic repair of a vesicouterine fistula. Vesicouterine fistulae are uncommon and have been estimated to account
for only 1% to 4% of all genitourinary fistulae. (1) Conservative measures are usually attempted first. They include bladder decompression
with an indwelling catheter and medical management to induce amenorrhea. (2) In select patients cystoscopic fulguration of the vesicular
portion of the fistula has also been proven to be effective. (3) Laparoscopic and robotic repairs have been reported as alternatives to open
surgery. Regardless of technique, adherence to the principles for genitourinary fistula repair will maximize the chances for success. Wide
exposure and excision of scar tissue around the fistula; tension-free closure of the wound in multiple layers; and utilization of an omental
or myouterine flap are all possible with minimally invasive techniques. (4, 5)
