Immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-related disease is characterized by the typical histopathological features of a dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate
rich in IgG4-positive plasma cells, a high ratio of IgG4- to IgG-positive cells, storiform fibrosis (cellular fibrosis organized in an
irregular whorled pattern), obliterative phlebitis, and variable presence of eosinophils. The disease exhibits systemic involvement but very
rarely involves the esophagus. A 33-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for evaluation of a 1-year history of progressive dysphagia.
Neck imaging revealed a 3.9-cm mass in the cervical esophagus and multifocal calcified lymph nodes in the lower neck and mediastinum. Two
previous tertiary hospitals failed to diagnose the patient's condition despite the use of ultrasound-guided needle biopsy of the neck tumor.
We performed neck imaging studies, a flexible endoscopic swallowing study, high-resolution manometry, upper endoscopy, and a review of the
previous pathologic slides. The patient was finally diagnosed with IgG4-related esophagitis and showed a good response to corticosteroid
therapy. We herein report a rare case of dysphagia associated with IgG4-related disease and present a review of the literature.
Immunoglobulin G4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a recently recognized systemic disease of unknown etiology and represents a syndrome
characterized by specific pathologic, serologic, and clinical features. It was first described in the context of type 1 autoimmune
pancreatitis.1–3 The disease is an inflammatory and fibrosing condition that causes tumor-like swelling of involved organs, sometimes
mimicking malignancy, and other inflammatory or immune-mediated disorders.4 It is often combined with elevated serum IgG4 concentrations.
IgG4-RD has been described in a variety of organs and often involves the pancreas. Extrapancreatic organs are also frequently affected,
including the biliary tree, salivary glands, periorbital tissues, kidneys, lungs, lymph nodes, meninges, aorta, breast, prostate, thyroid,
pericardium, and skin. However, IgG4-RD is extremely rare in the esophagus.4,5 The clinical presentation depends on the involved tissues.
However, the histopathologic findings seem to be similar regardless of location, and diagnosis is therefore based on histopathology and
immunohistochemistry. Additionally, patients often respond well to corticosteroid and immunosuppressive therapy.3 We herein report a rare
case of IgG4-RD presenting as a tumor-like esophageal mass that showed a good response to corticosteroid therapy. A previously healthy
33-year-old man presented with a 1-year history of progressive dysphagia involving both solids and liquids and a 5-kg body weight loss. He
had no smoking or drinking history. The patient had previously visited 2 different tertiary hospitals, where he underwent neck computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging. The neck imaging studies revealed an approximately 3.9-cm mass in the cervical esophagus and
multifocal calcified lymph nodes in the lower neck and mediastinum. Ultrasound-guided biopsy of the neck mass showed suspicion of
tuberculosis. However, there was no evidence of tuberculosis in the pathologic or microbiologic examinations. During the previous hospital
visits, the patient was informed of the findings and the need for empirical treatment of tuberculosis; however, he refused to undergo
antituberculosis treatment. Upon presentation to our department, no masses were palpable in the neck, and the physical examination was
unremarkable. All laboratory data, including the white blood cell count, platelet count, biochemical parameters, and blood glucose level,
were within normal limits. We reviewed the previously performed computed tomography (CT) scan (Figure 1A) and observed the esophageal mass,
which had not changed in size and was causing mild indentation and shifting of the trachea. A gastrografin esophagogram revealed a filling
defect with a nodular outline involving the cervical esophagus. A large amount of residue was noted at both pyriform sinuses (Figure 1B).
Fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES) showed a large amount of residue at both pyriform recesses and relatively less residue
at the valleculae, suggesting cricopharyngeal dysphagia (Figure 1C). High-resolution manometry showed repetitive swallowing,
hypercontraction just below the upper esophageal sphincter, a hypercontractile portion with a declining pattern related to bolus transit,
and a 3.9-cm-long hypercontractile portion (Figure 1G). Upper endoscopy revealed a severe stricture without mucosal change. Neck computed
tomography, gastrografin esophagography, flexible endoscopic evaluation of swallowing, and high-resolution manometry (A–C, G) before and
(D–F, H) after treatment with prednisolone. (A) An approximately 3.9-cm mass in the esophagus causing mild indentation and shifting of the
trachea. (B) Dilated pharyngeal cavity with a large amount of residue at both pyriform sinuses. (C) Severe amount of residue at both
pyriform recesses. (D) Decreased size of ill-defined mass surrounding lower cervical esophagus and improved indentation of abutting trachea.
(E) Near resolution of upper esophageal stricture. (F) No residue at either of the pyriform recesses or the valleculae. (G) Repetitive
swallowing and hypercontraction just below the upper esophageal sphincter 11 months after treatment. (H) Complete disappearance of the
hypercontraction just above the upper esophageal sphincter and appearance of normal upper esophageal contraction. We also reviewed the
pathological sections obtained from the previous ultrasound-guided needle biopsy. Re-examination of the tissue specimens from the esophageal
mass revealed proliferation of spindle cells and small vessels and infiltration of inflammatory cells (Figure 2) on a sclerotic background
with entrapped blood vessels (Figure 2A) and nerve fibers (Figure 2B). The infiltrating inflammatory cells comprised many plasma cells and
eosinophils (Figure 2C). Immunohistochemical examination revealed 12 IgG4-positive cells per high-power field (Figure 2D). The serum IgG4
level was elevated at 264 mg/dL (reference range, <135 mg/dL). Pathologic findings. Low-power view shows proliferation of spindle cells and
small vessels and infiltration of inflammatory cells on a sclerotic background with entrapped (A) blood vessels and (B) nerve fibers
(hematoxylin and eosin, ×100). (C) Infiltrating inflammatory cells comprising many plasma cells and eosinophils (hematoxylin and eosin,
×400). (D) Immunohistochemistry exhibits a few IgG4-positive cells. Considering all of the above findings, the patient was finally diagnosed
with IgG4-RD-associated dysphagia and treated with 40 mg/day prednisolone for 4 weeks with a subsequent 10-mg dose decrease every 2 weeks.
He was maintained on steroid therapy at 5 mg/day for 11 months, after which he underwent follow-up neck CT (Figure 1D), gastrografin
esophagography (Figure 1E), esophagogastroduodenoscopy, and FEES (Figure 1F). Neck CT showed that the ill-defined mass surrounding the lower
cervical esophagus had decreased in size and that the associated tracheal indentation had improved. Esophagography revealed near resolution
of the upper esophageal stricture. No residue was present at either of the pyriform recesses or the valleculae on FEES, and high-resolution
manometry showed complete disappearance of the hypercontraction just above the upper esophageal sphincter and the appearance of normal upper
esophageal contraction (Figure 1H). All study results indicated improvement in the patient's condition. The patient was eventually able to
tolerate a solid diet. Little is known about IgG4-RD-associated dysphagia. To date, only 3 case reports have described IgG4-RD involving the
esophagus.5–7 (Table 1). The 1st case was mistaken for an esophageal gastrointestinal stromal tumor but was finally diagnosed correctly by
surgery. The 2nd case was found to be IgG4-RD after esophagectomy. Interestingly, upper endoscopy with biopsy failed to diagnose the IgG4-RD
in either case, even with visibly abnormal mucosal findings in the 2nd case. The most delayed diagnosis was noted in the 3rd case. The
present case highlights the diagnostic challenges associated with IgG4-RD in a dysphagic patient. First, the diagnosis is usually delayed
due to the extreme rarity of IgG4-RD with esophageal involvement. IgG4-RD has also been recognized recently as an immune-mediated condition.
Second, the presentation of IgG4-RD is nonspecific because the symptoms depend on the affected organ. The reported symptoms of esophageal
involvement include dysphagia, odynophagia, and weight loss. Endoscopy can reveal simple esophagitis, ulceration, stricture formation,
submucosal tumors, or even evidence of malignancy. The duration from the 1st symptom to diagnosis ranges from 11 months to 10 years.5–7
Summary of Previously Published Case Reports of IgG4-Related Esophagitis Finally, careful interpretation of ultrasound-guided samples can
lead to an accurate diagnosis of IgG4-RD. In the present case, the 2 previous hospitals failed to diagnose the IgG4-RD despite the
performance of ultrasound-guided needle biopsy. This is because the cytologic findings of IgG4-RD are unfamiliar to many pathologists and
gastroenterologists. In conclusion, clinicians should have a high index of suspicion for IgG4-RD in dysphagic patients presenting with an
esophageal stricture, ulcer, or tumor. The authors thank the Soonchunhyang University Research Fund for the support. Abbreviations: IgG4 =
immunoglobulin G4, IgG4-RD = immunoglobulin G4-related disease, CT = computed tomography, FEES = fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of
swallowing. The Institutional Review Board of Soonchunhyang University Hospital stated that it was not necessary to achieve IRB approval for
this case report, but that patient consent was required as the study dealt only with retrospective use of the patient's medical record and
related images. This work was supported in part by the Soonchunhyang University Research Fund. The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
