The effect of chest wall tumours on chest wall mechanics is uncertain even less is known about the effects of resection and reconstruction.
Our aim is to study how chest wall mechanics are altered in chest wall sarcoma and to determine the effect of chest wall reconstruction on
chest wall kinetics. Using Optoelectronic Plethysmography (OEP), total and regional chest wall volumes were measured in a patient with
unilateral extra-thoracic chest wall sarcoma, before and 5 months after resection and reconstruction, during quiet breathing and exercise
using cycle ergometry. During quiet breathing the unilateral tumour was associated with reduced in motion of the lower rib cage and
abdominal compartments on both sides of the chest as well as asynchronous motion of the contralateral lower rib cage. Surgery corrected
these abnormalities in quiet breathing. But during exercise there was a reduction in the upper rib cage motion compared to pre-operative
measures from 0.43+/−0.06 to 0.36 +/− 0.02 L postoperatively (p <0.05). This impairment was characterised by a significant increase in the
end expiratory volume on the operated side of the chest 5 months after surgery by 6.5 +/− 0.6 and 5.7 +/− 0.7 % during 50 and 100 % exercise
respectively (p <0.0001) a finding that was not replicated in the non-operated side. This physiological study demonstrates the negative
effect of chest wall tumours on global chest wall mechanics during quiet breathing and exercise and shows that surgery reverses this
abnormality, but only at rest. Sarcomas are rare tumours where dyspnoea can be a presenting symptom whether this a result of dysfunctional
chest wall motion in these patients is yet to be known. Furthermore ideal reconstructive prosthesis is still a matter of debate and is
largely depend on the surgeon’s preference. The effect of type of prosthesis on chest wall dynamics has not been reported before. In this
case study we describe for the first time in detail how chest wall mechanics are altered in a patient with isolated extra-thoracic chest
wall sarcoma who undergoes chest wall resection and reconstruction using non-rigid prosthesis both during quiet breathing and exercise.
Using Optoelectronic Plethysmography (OEP), total and regional chest wall volumes were measured using eight infrared cameras, tracking the
displacement of 89 chest wall markers on the patient’s chest, calculating compartmental motion and volumes . Our subject is a 76 year old
male patient diagnosed with spindle cell sarcoma of the right postero-lateral extrathoracic aspect of the chest wall: the tumour was 12 cm ×
8 cm in size lying deep and inferior to the right scapula extending down to the 10th rib and involving the 4th rib (Fig. 1). Surgery was
performed by mobilizing the latissmus dorsi muscle of the tumour, the 4th rib and the serratus anterior muscle attached to the tumour were
excised en bloc. The resulting defect was covered with a tightly secured prolene mesh and a rotated latissmus dorsi flap. Spirometry was
performed prior to every chest wall motion capture. Chest wall motion was measured in an erect position during quiet breathing and exercise
using cycle ergometry preoperatively and postoperatively at 5 months as previously described .Fig. 1These two CT scans of the chest
illustrate the preoperative chest wall sarcoma (circle - left) and 5 month postoperatively the prolene mesh reconstruction (right) These two
CT scans of the chest illustrate the preoperative chest wall sarcoma (circle - left) and 5 month postoperatively the prolene mesh
reconstruction (right) Data is presented as mean (±SD) for normally distributed data. Paired student t tests were used to compare data
before and after surgery. A statistical significance of 0.05 was used for all analyses. During quiet breathing there was asynchronous lower
rib cage compartment motion on the opposite side to the tumour compared to all other compartments. This asynchrony corrected when measured
5 months after surgery (Fig. 2).Fig. 2This graph demonstrates a breath-by-breath analysis examining the synchrony between chest
compartments. The left panel shows pre-operative chest wall motion during quiet breathing, from top to bottom of the upper rib cage (RCP),
lower rib cage (RCA) and the abdomen (AB) respectively. The red line represents the operated side and blue line the non-operated. The right
panel shows motion in each compartment 5 months after surgery. The lower rib cage on the opposite side to the tumor side lagged by 56.8 +/−
15.1° out of phase compared to the side with the tumour. After surgery this asynchrony improved to 14.4 +/− 9.6° (p = 0.002) This graph
demonstrates a breath-by-breath analysis examining the synchrony between chest compartments. The left panel shows pre-operative chest wall
motion during quiet breathing, from top to bottom of the upper rib cage (RCP), lower rib cage (RCA) and the abdomen (AB) respectively. The
red line represents the operated side and blue line the non-operated. The right panel shows motion in each compartment 5 months after
surgery. The lower rib cage on the opposite side to the tumor side lagged by 56.8 +/− 15.1° out of phase compared to the side with the
tumour. After surgery this asynchrony improved to 14.4 +/− 9.6° (p = 0.002) Five months after surgery during quiet breathing the overall
tidal volume significantly improved by 23 +/− 22 % compared to the preoperative value (p <0.002). This was due to an increased contribution
of the lower rib cage and abdominal compartments by 107 +/− 42 % (p <0.001) and 17 +/− 20 % (p <0.01) respectively, equally on both sides of
the chest. During exercise there was a 41 +/− 15 % reduction of the upper rib cage motion on the operated side 5 months after surgery (p
<0.001) this was not replicated on the non-operated side. Sub-analysis of the end expiratory (EEV) and inspiratory volumes during exercise
showed that, the reduction of the motion in the upper rib cage on the operated side was due to an increase in the EEV on that side
(Table 2). There was also a 55.6 % significant reduction of the expiratory reserve volume on that side of upper rib cage during the same
time frame (p <0.05).Table 1Respiratory parameters measured using OEP during quiet breathing before and 5 months after right chest wall
resectionPreoperatively5 months post opValue (L)Value (L) P Overall Tidal volume0.45 +/− 0.070.52 +/− 0.030.002Tidal Volume of upper rib
cage0.15 +/ 0.030.14 +/− 0.020.31Tidal volume of lower rib cage0.04 +/− 0.010.08 +/− 0.010.0001Tidal volume of abdomen0.26 +/− 0.050.3 +/−
0.020.01Tidal volume of right lower rib cage (operated side)0.03 +/− 0.010.04 +/− 0.010.0001Tidal volume of left lower rib cage (non-
operated side)0.02 +/− 0.010.04 +/− 0.010.0001Tidal volume of right chest (operated side)0.22 +/− 0.040.25 +/− 0.020.005Tidal volume of left
chest (non-operated side)0.23 +/− 0.040.27 +/− 0.020.0008Table 2The table shows the change in EEV volume of the RCP on both sides of chest
during 50 and 100 % exercise before and 5 months after surgery (Neg : negative change). Its clear EEV of RCP on the operated side to
increased after surgery during 50 and 100 % exercise suggesting a defective expiratory mechanism on the that sideChange at 5 monthsP Value△
EEV on RCP operated side50 % Exercise6.5 +/− 0.6 %0.0001100 % Exercise5.7 +/− 0.7 %0.0001△ EEV on RCP non-operated side50 % ExerciseNeg 1.6
+/− 1.1 %0.0006100 % ExerciseNeg 1.2 +/− 0.8 %0.0001 Respiratory parameters measured using OEP during quiet breathing before and 5 months
after right chest wall resection The table shows the change in EEV volume of the RCP on both sides of chest during 50 and 100 % exercise
before and 5 months after surgery (Neg : negative change). Its clear EEV of RCP on the operated side to increased after surgery during 50
and 100 % exercise suggesting a defective expiratory mechanism on the that side The forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) was 2.7
+/− 0.2 L litres preoperatively (99 % predicted) and the forced vital capacity (FVC) was 3.67 +/− 0.2 (108 % predicted). Five month after
surgery there was a significant reduction in FEV1 to 2.38 +/− 0.2 L (p <0.05) but the FVC remained unchanged 3.69 +/− 0.3 L (p 0.06). Our
case report shows that an extra-thoracic chest wall sarcoma exerts a restrictive mass effect on regional chest wall motion resulting in
asynchrony and reduced volumes in the lower rib and abdomen compartments due to the position of the tumour. Similar findings are described
in individuals with restrictive pulmonary disease . This defect improves following resection and reconstruction with a semi rigid taught
prolene mesh. As the chest wall works as a unit the impairment is apparent on both sides of the chest though the tumour is unilateral. We
are uncertain as to why it is the contralateral lower rib cage side that lags behind all other compartments but it may be due to a
mechanical displacement of that part of the chest due to the presence of such a large tumour. Removing the extra thoracic chest wall tumour
and covering the defect with a Prolene mesh reversed restriction and restored synchrony during quiet breathing. However after surgery during
exercise there was a significant reduction in the motion of upper rib cage compartment compared to preoperative values due defective
expiratory mechanics on the operated side following reconstruction. This is further supported by a persistently reduced FEV1 after surgery.
This physiological study demonstrates the negative effect of chest wall tumours on global chest wall mechanics during quiet breathing and
exercise and describes how surgery in part reverses this abnormality. Further studies are required to look at the effects of rigid and
physiological type repairs and to correlate findings with patients’ function and disability. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The abdomen End expiratory volume The forced expiratory volume in one second Negative Optoelectronic
plethysmography Lower rib cage The upper rib cage (RCP) Competing interest The authors declare that they have no competing interests
Authors’ contributions GE: Have made substantial contributions to the acquisition of data, analysis, interpretation of data and writing the
manuscript. AA.: Revised the manuscript critically. LP: technical support in data analysis. PK: revised the manuscript critically. MK:
revised the manuscript critically. BN: Designed and supervised the whole project. Revised the manuscript critically. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
