Dropped head syndrome (DHS) is a famous but unusual late complication of multimodality treatment for head and neck carcinoma. We reported
this early-onset complication and analyzed the dose to the neck extensor muscles. We examined the records of three patients with DHS after
radiotherapy. The doses to the neck extensor muscles were compared between three patients with DHS and nine patients without DHS. The mean
dose to the neck extensor muscles of the three patients with DHS were 58.5 Gy, 42.3 Gy and 60.9 Gy, while the dose was <50 Gy in all nine
patients in the control group. The onset of this syndrome was 5 months, 6 months and 15 months. The early-onset DHS may have something to do
with dose to the neck extensor muscles. The proposed dose to the neck extensor muscles might be <46 Gy (or at least <50 Gy). Dropped head
syndrome (DHS) is caused by various neuromuscular disorders . It is also a famous but rare complication of radiotherapy . This syndrome is
characterized by weakness of neck extensor muscles, causing an inability to extend the neck and resulting in the patient's posture having
the head flexed forward. The etiology and treatment remain unclear due to its rarity. This syndrome has been reported as a late-onset
complication following radiotherapy . Recently, a few case reports have been published about early-onset DHS after multimodality treatment
for head and neck carcinoma [7, 8]. We have had experience of three patients with early-onset DHS. These patients were treated with
intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) for head and neck carcinoma. This study was conducted to report this rare complication, to analyze
the dose to the neck extensor muscles, and to propose dose constraints. We have had experience of three patients with DHS following
radiotherapy for head and neck carcinoma. Details of patient characteristics, treatment and clinical course are described. The irradiated
dose to the neck extensor muscles was analyzed. The neck extensor muscles were contoured, including the splenius muscles, semispinalis
muscles, and spinalis muscles. The doses to the neck extensor muscles were compared between the three patients with DHS and the nine
patients without DHS as a control. The dose to the right, left and both neck extensor muscles was analyzed. The compared parameters were
mean dose, V10 Gy, V20 Gy, V30 Gy, V40 Gy, V50 Gy, V60 Gy and V70 Gy (%). The control group patients were selected because they were
irradiated with IMRT in the same time period and the level V area was included in the radiation fields (located in close vicinity to the
neck extensor muscles). Six patients had nasopharyngeal carcinoma, two patients had oropharyngeal carcinoma, and the remaining patient had
hypopharyngeal carcinoma. One patient with oropharyngeal carcinoma and two patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma were treated using
radiotherapy alone, and the others were treated using chemoradiotherapy. Our institutional review board (The National Cancer Center
Institutional Review Board, Japan) approved this study. Table 1 shows the details of the patients with DHS. Patient 1 was a 62-year-old man
with synchronous hypopharyngeal and esophageal carcinomas treated with chemoradiotherapy; he presented with head drop 5 months after
completion of radiotherapy. The patient suffered from pain and bending deformity of the neck, and disturbed daily activity. The physical
examination, CT and MRI showed no atrophy of the neck extensor muscles. The disease relapsed at the left hilar and mediastinal lymph node 13
months after radiotherapy. Salvage chemotherapy was administered without response. The patient was observed for 22 months after the
occurrence of DHS, and the symptoms were slightly improved despite the salvage chemotherapy. IMRT was applied to the treatment of the
hypopharyngeal carcinoma. The mean dose to the neck extensor muscles was 58.5 Gy/35 fractions. A total of two cycles of concurrent
chemotherapy of 5FU (700 mg/m2 Days 1–4) and cisplatin (70 mg/m2 Day 1) were administered. Table 1.Patients'
characteristicsAgeSexDiseaseStageTreatmentRadiotherapyChemotherapyMean dose to neck extensor muscles/fractionsLatent periodPatient
162MHypopharyngeal carcinomaT3N2bM0CRTIMRT 70 Gy for hypopharyngeal carcinomaCDDP + 5FU58.5 Gy/35 fractions5 monthsEsophageal
carcinomaT3N2M03DCRT 60 Gy for esophageal carcinomaPatient 273FNasopharyngeal carcinomaT2N0M0RTIMRT 70 Gy and additional 3DCRT 10 Gy for
primary disease42.3 Gy/40 fractions6 monthsPatient 355MNasopharyngeal carcinomaT1N2M0CRTIMRT 70 GyCDDP60.9 Gy/35 fractions15 monthsCRT =
chemoradiotherapy; RT = radiotherapy; IMRT = intensity-modulated radiotherapy; 3DCRT = 3D conformal radiotherapy. Patients' characteristics
CRT = chemoradiotherapy; RT = radiotherapy; IMRT = intensity-modulated radiotherapy; 3DCRT = 3D conformal radiotherapy. Patient 2 was a
73-year-old woman with nasopharyngeal carcinoma treated with radiotherapy alone, and she presented with head drop 6 months after completion
of radiotherapy. The patient suffered from pain with neck bending. The physical examination and MRI showed no atrophy of the neck extensor
muscles. She had no recurrence and was observed for 8 months after the onset of DHS. The symptoms did not change. The radiotherapy dose was
70 Gy/35 fractions for nasopharyngeal carcinoma and, additionally, 10 Gy/5 fractions were prescribed as a boost for the primary disease
because the tumor response was not good. Mean dose to the neck extensor muscles was 42.3 Gy/40 fractions. Patient 3 was a 55-year-old man
with nasopharyngeal carcinoma treated with chemoradiotherapy, and he presented with head drop 15 months after completion of radiotherapy.
The patient suffered from pain with neck bending. The physical examination, CT and MRI showed no atrophy of the neck extensor muscles. His
symptom of DHS was slightly improved till 19 months after the onset of DHS. The mean dose to the neck extensor muscles was 60.9 Gy/35
fractions. A total of three cycles of concurrent chemotherapy of cisplatin (80 mg/m2 Day 1) were administered. Additionally, two cycles of
adjuvant chemotherapy of 5FU (700 mg/m2 Days 1–5) and cisplatin (70 mg/m2 Day 1) were administered. Figure 1 shows the DVHs of the neck
extensor muscles of all 12 patients, and Table 2 shows doses analyses for both, right and left neck extensor muscles. Two of the three
patients with DHS were exposed to >50 Gy mean dose to the neck extensor muscles. Patients without DHS were exposed to <50 Gy mean dose to
the neck extensor muscles. One patient with DHS was irradiated by only 42.3 Gy mean dose to the neck extensor muscles. The dose to the right
and left neck extensor muscles was not different in the patients with DHS. The comparison of the dose–volume histogram analysis revealed V60
Gy and V70 Gy were significantly greater in the patients with DHS compared with in those without DHS. The mean value of V60 Gy and V70 Gy
was 32.7 and 7.0% in the patients with DHS, and 5.7 and 0.4% in the patients without DHS. The onset time was 5 months, 6 months and 15
months after radiotherapy, and the latency period did not seem to be related to dose to the neck extensor muscles. Fig. 1.Dose–volume
histogram of the neck extensor muscles of three patients with dropped head syndrome and nine patients without dropped head syndrome. Table
2.The comparison of dose to the neck extensor muscles between patients with and without dropped head syndromeBoth neck extensor
musclesPatient 1 (DHS +)Patient 2 (DHS +)Patient 3 (DHS +)DHS –DHS –DHS –DHS –DHS –DHS –DHS –DHS –DHS –DHS + meanDHS – meanP valueMean dose
(Gy)58.542.360.947.329.245.730.649.735.547.242.749.653.941.90.061V10 Gy (%)1001001001001001001001001001009710010099.70.58V20
Gy10010010010010010096100991009410010098.80.37V30 Gy100991001002888469974100879699.779.80.22V40 Gy996610083106812884077617688.357.20.12V50
Gy80119835035448936195363.026.60.068V60 Gy470515010040662032.75.70.015*V70 Gy100110010000217.00.40.0056*Rt neck extensor musclesMean dose
(Gy)60.242.260.348.027.944.725.652.737.146.141.346.854.241.10.065V10 Gy (%)1001001001001001001001001001009810010099.80.58V20
Gy10010010010010010093100991009510010098.60.38V30 Gy1009810010018861610080100839699.375.40.26V40 Gy10065100836640994375567088.355.10.14V50
Gy871196400330671331124364.726.60.075V60 Gy5314760909020833.73.80.0070*V70 Gy130120010000008.30.10.0035*Lt neck extensor musclesMean dose
(Gy)57.342.461.446.530.646.635.147.333.948.244.152.453.742.70.070V10 Gy (%)1001001001001001001001001001009710010099.70.58V20
Gy100100100100100100100100991009410010099.20.52V30 Gy100991001003990739869100919799.784.10.23V40 Gy976810083157223773679688188.359.30.11V50
Gy77109930037728640276462.026.60.081V60 Gy46055401100011123133.77.70.035*V70 Gy60110000000425.70.70.022**P < 0.05; DHS = dropped head
syndrome. Dose–volume histogram of the neck extensor muscles of three patients with dropped head syndrome and nine patients without dropped
head syndrome. The comparison of dose to the neck extensor muscles between patients with and without dropped head syndrome P < 0.05; DHS =
dropped head syndrome. Three patients with early-onset DHS are described in this report. The mechanism of this syndrome remains unclear.
Previous reported cases of DHS are summarized in Table 3. Cases 1–3 in Table 3 (reported by Rowin et al.) presented with DHS many years
after radiotherapy, and all three cases showed muscle atrophy . Patients with DHS in our study differed from those of Rowin et al.'s report
in that the onset was considerably earlier, the neck extensor muscles did not show atrophy, and the symptoms improved slightly. We consider
that the early-onset DHS differs from late-onset DHS. Recently, early-onset DHS has been reported (Case 4–9 in Table 3) [7, 8]. In contrast
to the findings of our study, neck extensor muscle atrophy was observed in the reported cases of early-onset DHS. The causes of this
difference remain unknown. Two of the three patients with DHS were exposed to >50 Gy to the neck extensor muscles, whereas the neck extensor
muscles in all nine patients without DHS were exposed to <50 Gy. Our hospital used 3D conformal radiotherapy (3DCRT) for head and neck
carcinomas until February 2006. From March 2006, IMRT has been employed. IMRT has various advantages in head and neck radiotherapy for
protecting the salivary gland, spinal cord, brain stem, brain, bone, thyroid, constrictor muscles, optic nerve and chiasma, and internal
ear. However, in protecting these organs from higher doses than the tolerances, hot spot areas can appear in other regions. Hot spot
appeared to the neck extensor muscles in patients with DHS. Because of spinal cord sparing and posterior neck boost irradiation using
electron beams in 3DCRT, the neck extensor muscles were exposed to between 40–46 Gy, and there were no early-onset DHS patients seen in our
hospital. From these results, we consider that the radiotherapy dose is associated with this early-onset DHS; therefore, we propose a dose
constraint to the neck extensor muscles of <46–50 Gy. Long-term follow-up and additional cases are needed in order to elucidate the cause
and treatment of this early-onset DHS. Table 3.Previous reported cases of dropped head
syndromeNo.AgeSexDiseaseStageTreatmentRadiotherapyChemotherapyLatent periodMuscle atrophySymptom improvement1 51MHodgkin's LymphomaMantle
field irradiation2 years+2 56MHodgkin's LymphomaWhole body radiation for initial treatment/Radiation therapy to the low back for recurrent
disease15 years+3 53FHodgkin's LymphomaMantle field irradiation and groin radiation therapyMOPP26 years+4 55Hypopharyngeal
carcinomaT3N3M0Total laryngectomy, right modified radical neck dissection and radiotherapy66 Gy/33 fractions2 months+No5 62Oropharyngeal
carcinomaT1N2cM0Laser resection, NAC and CRT/ salvage neck dissection68 Gy/34 fractionsTaxotere, CDDP, 5FU/CDDP6 months+No6 52MOral cavity
carcinomaT4aN2cM0Partial glossectomy, bilateral neck dissection and CRT66 Gy/33 fractionsCDDP3 months+No7 63Oropharyngeal
carcinomaT4N2cM0NAC (TPF) and CRT68 Gy/34 fractionsTPF/CDDP4 months+8 51FOropharyngeal carcinomaT4N2bM0NAC (TPF) and CRT68 Gy/34
fractionsTPF/CDDP5 months+9 53FLaryngeal carcinomaT3N2M0CRT and bilateral neck dissection75.8 GyCDDPImmediately after surgery+NoNAC =
neoadjuvant chemotherapy; CRT = chemoradiotherapy; TPF = docetaxel, cisplatin and 5-FU. Previous reported cases of dropped head syndrome NAC
= neoadjuvant chemotherapy; CRT = chemoradiotherapy; TPF = docetaxel, cisplatin and 5-FU. This work was supported partially by Health and
Labour Sciences Research Expenses for Commission (H26-applied-general-036) and the Practical Research for Innovative Cancer Control from
Japan Agency for Medical Research and development, AMED. Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was provided by
the Practical Research for Innovative Cancer Control from Japan Agency for Medical Research and development, AMED.
