Loss-of-function mutations in DOCK8 are linked to hyper-IgE syndrome. Patients typically present with recurrent sinopulmonary infections,
severe cutaneous viral infections, food allergies and elevated serum IgE. Although patients may present with a spectrum of disease-related
symptoms, molecular mechanisms explaining phenotypic variability in patients are poorly defined. Here we characterized a novel compound
heterozygous mutation in DOCK8 in a patient diagnosed with primary combined immunodeficiency which was not typical of classical DOCK8
deficiency. In contrast to previously identified mutations in DOCK8 which result in complete loss of function, the newly identified single
nucleotide insertion results in expression of a truncated DOCK8 protein. Functional evaluation of the truncated DOCK8 protein revealed its
hypomorphic function. In addition we found somatic reversion of DOCK8 predominantly in T cells. The combination of somatic reversion and
hypomorphic DOCK8 function explains the milder and atypical phenotype of the patient and further broadens the spectrum of DOCK8-associated
disease. • Whole exome sequencing identified the underlying defect in a patient with combined immunodeficiency. • A novel compound
heterozygous DOCK8 mutation was identified. • Expression of a truncated DOCK8 protein with hypomorphic function was identified. • Somatic
reversion of DOCK8 mainly in T cells was identified. • DOCK8 deficiency may present without severe viral infections and increased serum IgE
levels. Whole exome sequencing identified the underlying defect in a patient with combined immunodeficiency. A novel compound heterozygous
DOCK8 mutation was identified. Expression of a truncated DOCK8 protein with hypomorphic function was identified. Somatic reversion of DOCK8
mainly in T cells was identified. DOCK8 deficiency may present without severe viral infections and increased serum IgE levels. Bi-allelic
loss-of-function mutations in the guanine-nucleotide exchange factor dedicator of cytokinesis 8 (DOCK8) cause autosomal recessive hyper-IgE
syndrome. The vast majority of DOCK8-deficient patients present with combined immunodeficiency characterized by recurrent sino-pulmonary
and/or gastrointestinal infections, severe cutaneous viral infections, severe atopy, eosinophilia and massively elevated serum IgE levels.
Patients also have a predisposition to cancer , . Recent studies have highlighted the phenotypic variability of patients suffering from
DOCK8-deficiency , . Patients with susceptibility to infection but less severe allergic disease were identified to carry a functional wild-
type DOCK8 allele in lymphocyte subpopulations due to somatic reversion of the mutated DOCK8 alleles . Here we report for the first time a
patient with a hypomorphic mutation in DOCK8 presenting with recurrent bacterial infections, low serum IgM and IgG, CD4 lymphopenia and
severely impaired vaccination responses, but without severe viral infections and severe atopy. Detailed information can be found in the
Supplementary data. We submitted the variants identified in DOCK8 to be made publically available by ClinVar
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/). The accession numbers are SCV000257461 (deletion chr9:204193-343954), SCV000257462 (c.65C>T),
SCV000257463 (c.289C>A), SCV000257464 (c4107C>G), SCV000257465 (c.5433G>A), and SCV000257466 (c.6019dupT). The female patient is the only
child of non-consanguineous, healthy parents. She presented aged eight with a two-year history of recurrent bacterial chest infections and
radiological signs of early bronchiectasis. The patient also had a long-standing history of mild eczema and asthma requiring treatment with
inhaled corticosteroids and beta-agonists. All routine childhood immunizations were received uneventfully. Immunological evaluation (Table
1) revealed low serum IgM, normal IgA and IgE, and borderline-low IgG levels which dropped significantly over 12 months. Measurement of
responses to previous immunizations demonstrated protective levels of IgG to tetanus toxoid but absent IgG to Haemophilus influenzae type b,
pneumococcal polysaccharides and measles. Also, despite a history of a normal course of chicken-pox, varicella zoster virus IgG was
undetectable. Lymphocyte subset analysis demonstrated low CD4+ T cell numbers and low frequencies of CD27+ effector B cells (Table 1).
Following the failure of antibiotic prophylaxis alone to reduce the infection burden, immunoglobulin replacement therapy was commenced with
a good clinical response. Sequence analysis of recombination-activating gene (RAG) 1, RAG2, and DNA cross-link repair 1C (DCLRE1C encoding
Artemis) did not reveal any mutations. Therefore the patient was given a diagnosis of undefined primary combined immunodeficiency. To
identify the underlying disease cause, we undertook whole exome sequencing (WES) on the patient and both parents. A novel heterozygous
frameshift variant was detected in DOCK8 in the patient and her mother. Sanger sequencing confirmed a single-nucleotide duplication
[c.6019dupT (p.Tyr2007Leufs*12)] within the conserved DOCK homology region 2 (DHR2) domain of DOCK8, leading to a frameshift and premature
stop-codon (Fig. 1, A and C, and Supplementary Table 1]. As autosomal recessive mutations in DOCK8 cause combined immunodeficiency, we
screened for further variants in DOCK8. Analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across DOCK8 in the trio revealed apparent loss
of paternal contribution of two SNPs in a 5′ region of the gene (Supplementary Table 1), indicating the possibility of a paternally
inherited deletion. Array comparative genomic hybridization analysis confirmed a large deletion encompassing exons 1–14 of DOCK8 in the
patient and her father (approx. 140 kb deletion of 9p24.3, base pair 204,193 to 343,954) (Fig. 1, B and C). This novel compound heterozygous
mutation in DOCK8 was the only disease-causing variant identified in the patient (Supplementary Tables 2–4). The deletion in DOCK8 is
predicted to result in the absence of any protein expression since the deletion includes the start codon. The frameshift mutation is
predicted to result in the production of a truncated protein lacking 81 amino acids (~ 11 kDa). Indeed, patient EBV cells expressed low
amounts of a truncated DOCK8 protein, but not the full-length protein (Fig. 1D). We hypothesized that this truncated DOCK8 protein has
hypomorphic function accounting for the milder clinical presentation of our patient. Previous studies of DOCK8-deficient patients report
impaired T cell proliferation , . At the age of ten years, both CD4+ and CD8+ patient T cells did not proliferate in response to mitogen
(PHA) stimulation (Fig. 2A), consistent with an inability of the truncated DOCK8 protein to transmit proliferative signals. Interestingly,
when studying T cell proliferation at the time of WES (four years later), proliferation of both CD4+ and CD8+ patient T cells was present,
although reduced compared to a healthy control (Fig. 2B). We hypothesized that this difference in T cell proliferation could be explained by
somatic reversion of DOCK8. Indeed, Sanger sequencing of DOCK8 cDNA of T cells and subsequent peak height quantification revealed that two
thirds of all DOCK8 transcripts are wild-type (Fig. 2C), showing somatic reversion of DOCK8 as previously described . Somatic reversion of
DOCK8 in T cells was confirmed by pyrosequencing of DOCK8 (Fig. 2D). Therefore improved T cell proliferation over time is likely to be due
to somatic reversion of DOCK8 in patient T cells. The frequency of somatic reversion in B cells was half compared to the DOCK8 reversion in
T cells (Fig. 2D) indicating a higher proportion of B cells expressing only the truncated DOCK8. Interestingly, patient CD19+ B cells
immortalized with EBV expressed only mutated DOCK8 transcripts (Fig. 2E) suggesting selective outgrowth of cells that did not undergo
somatic reversion. As migration of DOCK8-deficient B cells has previously been shown to be impaired , we investigated the functionality of
the truncated DOCK8 protein in a transwell assay using the patient EBV B cells expressing only the truncated version of DOCK8. Migration of
patient EBV B cells was comparable to the EBV B cell lines of healthy controls and significantly better than that of EBV B cells of a
patient with complete loss-of-function mutation in DOCK8 (DOCK8null) (Fig. 2F). This shows that migration was not significantly affected by
the truncation of the DOCK8 protein. DOCK8 is a large protein with at least two described functional domains, the N-terminal DOCK homology
region (DHR) 1 domain and the C-terminal DHR2 domain. There is only little data available on which downstream cellular functions are
mediated by each domain. Our data showing normal migration of patient EBV cells expressing a truncated DOCK8 protein in which the C-terminal
DHR2 domain is disrupted suggest that this domain is dispensable for lymphocyte migration. In line, Ham et al. showed that the N-terminal
region of DOCK8, but not the C-terminal region of DOCK8 is a crucial binding site for Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp), a protein
involved in actin cytoskeleton remodeling and migration. The C-terminal DHR2 domain of DOCK8 exhibits the guanine nucleotide exchange in the
small GTPase cell division control protein 42 homolog (CDC42). To our knowledge it is not yet clear which cellular functions are modulated
by signaling events initiated by the DOCK8-mediated guanine nucleotide exchange. Absent T cell proliferation when the patient presented
initially in clinic, presumably before somatic reversion took place, suggests that lymphocyte proliferation is likely modulated by the
guanine nucleotide exchange function in the DHR2 domain. Further in-depth characterization of truncated DOCK8 proteins will provide a
valuable tool for gaining a better understanding of the function of DOCK8 in immune regulation and genotype–phenotype correlations in
various patients with DOCK8 deficiencies. Currently, curative hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the definitive treatment for
DOCK8 deficiency. Without HSCT, infections and an increased risk of developing malignancies due to impaired clearance of oncogenic viruses
are life-threatening complications associated with DOCK8 deficiency. HSCT is expected to prevent both; however there is no data available on
the development of malignancies post-HSCT. In our patient, expression of truncated, partially functional DOCK8 in combination with somatic
reversion in T cells is sufficient to maintain antiviral immunity, as shown by the absence of severe viral infections. Therefore, the risk
versus benefit of HSCT is unclear in patients with less severe disease and demands careful consideration. Here we reported a patient with
atypical DOCK8 deficiency characterized by a much milder phenotype of the immunodeficiency compared to classical DOCK8 deficiency which
further broadens the spectrum of DOCK8 associated diseases. As suggested by normal patient EBV B cell migration and initially absent T cell
proliferation in addition to somatic reversion of DOCK8 predominantly in T cells, this relatively mild phenotype is the result of
hypomorphic DOCK8 function and somatic reversion. None of the authors has any potential financial conflict of interest related to this
manuscript. This work was supported by the Oxford Partnership Comprehensive Biomedical Research Centre with funding from the Department of
Health's National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) (IS-BRC-0211-10025) Biomedical Research Centre funding scheme. The views expressed in
this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Department of Health. B.F. was supported by the NIHR Chief
Scientist Funding. Supplementary material Supplementary tables 1–4 Supplementary material Supplementary tables 1–4 We thank Dr. V. Lougaris
for providing the EBV line of a patient with DOCK8 loss-of-function mutation. We thank Dr. F. Dhalla for help in clinical care and sample
collection. We thank Dr. D.F. Kelly for the critical reading of the manuscript. We thank the members of the Clinical Immunology Laboratory
at Great Ormond Street Hospital for their contribution to the immunological characterization of the patient. We thank the patient and her
family for their support and cooperation. This work was supported by the Oxford Partnership Comprehensive Biomedical Research Centre with
funding from the Department of Health's National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre funding scheme. The views
expressed in this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Department of Health. B.F. was supported by the NIHR
Chief Scientist Funding. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2015.12.003. A novel
compound heterozygous mutation in DOCK8 results in expression of a truncated DOCK8 protein. (A) Sanger sequencing results for the single
nucleotide duplication, c.6019dupT, p.(Tyr2007Leufs*12). The upper panel illustrates a normal control trace and the lower panel shows the
presence of the mutation; the duplicated T nucleotide is indicated by the arrow. (B) Results of array comparative genomic hybridization
illustrating the about 140 kb deletion in 9p24.3 (204,193–343,954). The deletion encompasses exons 1–14 of DOCK8. (C) Graphic depicting the
wild-type DOCK8 protein structure and the outcome of the single-nucleotide insertion on the maternal allele and the deletion in DOCK8 on the
paternal allele on DOCK8 protein expression (DOCK8 transcript reference is ENST00000453981). (D) DOCK8 protein expression in EBV-transformed
B cells of a healthy control (7.5 μg protein lysate) and the patient (30 μg protein lysate). Actin was used as loading control. Improvement
of T cell proliferation over time, somatic reversion of DOCK8 in T cells and hypomorphic function of the truncated DOCK8 protein.
Proliferation of PHA-stimulated, CFSE-labeled PBMCs of the patient at (A) 10 and (B) 15 years of age, and a healthy control. Depicted are
percentages of CFSElow cells gated on CD3+ CD4+ or CD4− or CD8+ T cells. (C) Sanger sequence trace showing somatic reversion of the single
nucleotide duplication (c.6019dupT) resulting in expression of about 60% wild-type DOCK8 transcripts in the patient's CD3+ T cells. (D) “T”
nucleotide phosphorescence ratios obtained by pyrosequencing DOCK8 of primary CD3+ CD4+ and CD3+ CD8+ T cells, primary CD19+ B cells and the
EBV B cell line of the patient. (T/± 1 or 2) depicts the signal ratio of c.6018-19T to nucleotides 1 and 2 positions up and downstream. The
PCR templates and pyrosequencing reactions were performed in triplicate. Each symbol represents the mean of the three ratio measurements at
respective nucleotide positions. The bar represents the mean “T” nucleotide phosphorescence ratio of all 4 different nucleotide ratios in
indicated cell populations. (E) Sanger sequence trace showing expression of solely mutated DOCK8 transcripts in EBV-transformed B cells of
the patient. The duplicated T-nucleotide is indicated by the arrow and #. (F) Migration of EBV-transformed B cells of 5 different healthy
controls (each symbol represents the mean of 3 independent experiments for each of the healthy control samples), the patient and a patient
with a complete loss-of-function mutation in DOCK8 (DOCK8null). The bar of the healthy control samples represents the mean of the mean of
each of the 5 healthy control samples. The bar for each of the patient samples represents mean and standard deviation of 3 independent
experiments for each sample. Immunological characteristics of the patient. N, value within normal range; ↑, value above normal range; ↓,
value below normal range; RTE, recent thymic emigrants; TREC, T cell receptor rearrangement excision circle; PHA, phytohemagglutinin. Serum
IgG dropped within a year after initial presentation. Serum IgE was measured after identification of the DOCK8 mutation on serum samples
frozen before start of immunoglobulin replacement therapy. 5–95 percentile range for age-matched controls adopted from . 10–90 percentile
range for age-matched controls adopted from .
