Cesarean scar syndrome results from a postoperative defect of the uterine isthmus, also known as an isthmocele. Patients present with
gynecological symptoms, such as abnormal genital bleeding or infertility, after cesarean delivery. Although the cesarean rate is increasing
worldwide, this syndrome is not widely known. A 43-year-old G2P1 Japanese woman with atypical cesarean scar syndrome had a 3-year history of
secondary infertility and postmenstrual brown discharge. Laparoscopic and hysteroscopic exploration revealed a cesarean scar defect
connected to a small cavity in the myometrium: this was not an endometrial cavity or a uterine diverticulum. After endoscopic excision of
the cavity, the brown discharge resolved, and the patient achieved ongoing pregnancy on her third attempt at intrauterine insemination.
Consensus is still lacking regarding the diagnosis and treatment of cesarean scar defect. However, the gynecologists should be aware that
cesarean scar syndrome can have scar defects forming cavities of unusual shapes and features. Surgical correction of these defects will
often improve postmenstrual bleeding and subfertility in these cases. Scar defects at the isthmus uteri, also known as cesarean scar defects
or isthmoceles, are often found after cesarean delivery . Cesarean scar defects are being more commonly reported but the incidence varied
between 24 and 84 % . Some women are asymptomatic, but others may have gynecologic symptoms such as postmenstrual spotting, prolonged
menstruation, continuous brown discharge, chronic pelvic pain , and secondary infertility [4, 5]. These symptoms, taken together, have been
closely investigated and are called cesarean scar syndrome . Other problems associated with cesarean scar defect are a higher risk of
complications during subsequent pregnancy , such as dehiscence, placenta previa or accreta and cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy , and
difficulty with gynecologic procedures like uterine evacuation, hysteroscopy, and intrauterine-device insertion . Recently, the clinical
relevance of cesarean scar defects has attracted an increasing amount of attention, with more review articles published, because cesarean
rates are rising worldwide [2, 9–12]. While symptom relief has been reported after surgical intervention, the etiology of the syndrome
itself and therapeutic effects on the risk of subsequent pregnancy complications or the difficulty of future gynecologic procedures are
still unclear. Additionally, a worldwide, unified detection method, diagnostic criteria, and treatment protocol are currently not available.
Therefore, a standardized definition for cesarean scar defect and thorough long-term follow-up are urgently required. We encountered a rare
case of an atypical cesarean scar defect connected to a small cavity in the myometrium. To the best of our knowledge, this presentation has
not yet been reported. We report our successful treatment of this case. A 43-year-old Japanese woman, gravida 2 para 1, had a 3-year history
of secondary infertility but had easily conceived her first child, 6 years ago, 3 months after discontinuing contraception. Her menstrual
cycle was regular at 28–30 days, with menses lasting for 5 days, but since her first child she experienced 2 weeks each month of
postmenstrual brown discharge. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed (Fig. 1a, b), raising the suspicion of a bicornuate uterus,
but this was not borne out on hysterosalpingography (Fig. 1c). Hysteroscopy revealed polyps at the site of the defect (Fig. 1e) and a cavity
bulging out to the patient’s right from the cesarean scar defect (Fig. 1d, f, g). The cavity in question was larger than the cesarean scar
defect, but less than half the size of the endometrial cavity. We speculated that a uterine diverticular hernia had arisen intraperitoneally
from the myometrial incision site and thus planned a laparoscopic excision of the diverticulum and repair of the cesarean scar defect.Fig. 1
a T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): red arrowhead indicates the cesarean scar defect. b T2-weighted MRI: the appearance of the
cavity (red arrow) is suspicious for a bicornuate uterus. c Hysterosalpingography: the right fallopian tube is not connected to the small
cavity (red arrow), ruling out a bicornuate uterus. d Schematic of the patient's uterus. (a: The cesarean scar defect, b: The small cavity)
(e-g) Hysteroscopic images. e Polyps (yellow arrowheads) around the cesarean scar defect (corresponding to “a” on schematic). f The entrance
(yellow arrow) of a small cavity viewed from the cesarean scar defect (corresponding to “h” on schematic). g The inside wall of the small
cavity (corresponding to “i” on schematic). The wall of the cavity is smooth and hard, with no endometrial tissue present a T2-weighted
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): red arrowhead indicates the cesarean scar defect. b T2-weighted MRI: the appearance of the cavity (red
arrow) is suspicious for a bicornuate uterus. c Hysterosalpingography: the right fallopian tube is not connected to the small cavity (red
arrow), ruling out a bicornuate uterus. d Schematic of the patient's uterus. (a: The cesarean scar defect, b: The small cavity) (e-g)
Hysteroscopic images. e Polyps (yellow arrowheads) around the cesarean scar defect (corresponding to “a” on schematic). f The entrance
(yellow arrow) of a small cavity viewed from the cesarean scar defect (corresponding to “h” on schematic). g The inside wall of the small
cavity (corresponding to “i” on schematic). The wall of the cavity is smooth and hard, with no endometrial tissue present Surprisingly,
laparoscopic intraperitoneal exploration did not reveal a uterine diverticulum (Fig. 2a). The cavity was not palpable even under the
vesicouterine pouch (Fig. 2b). Therefore, we introduced a hysteroscopic bipolar device through the cavity to perforate the myometrium
(Fig. 2c). We then cut into the myometrium, along the device, to open the cavity (Fig. 2d). After the cavity walls were resected and
debrided, the cavity space was closed with absorbable sutures under laparoscopic guidance. We confirmed the obliteration of the cavity using
a hysteroscope, then removed polyps and scar tissues at the cesarean scar defect hysteroscopically. A leak test was performed using indigo
carmine solution before completion of surgery. Pathological examination revealed that the polyps at the cesarean scar defect site (Fig. 1e)
were composed of endometrial glands and the cavity wall (Fig. 1g) consisted of hyalinized myometrium.Fig. 2Laparoscopic images. a No
extrauterine cystic mass is present. b No uterine diverciculum is detected under the vesicouterine pouch. The yellow arrow indicates the
anterior vaginal fornix. c The bipolar device (yellow arrowhead) penetrating through the myometrium. Inset: schematic illustration. d The
opened cavity (yellow arrowhead) Laparoscopic images. a No extrauterine cystic mass is present. b No uterine diverciculum is detected under
the vesicouterine pouch. The yellow arrow indicates the anterior vaginal fornix. c The bipolar device (yellow arrowhead) penetrating through
the myometrium. Inset: schematic illustration. d The opened cavity (yellow arrowhead) The patient’s postmenstrual discharge stopped
immediately after the surgery. A hysteroscopic examination was performed 3 months later and confirmed that the cavity had not recurred; the
patient was cleared to attempt pregnancy. She conceived a month later with first attempt at intrauterine insemination. Unfortunately, this
pregnancy ended in a miscarriage at 6 weeks' gestation. However, she conceived again through her third intrauterine insemination and, in
consideration for the vulnerability of the repair site, cesarean section was performed at 37 weeks of pregnancy. We were able to
successfully treat a patient with atypical cesarean scar defect. In this case, the cesarean scar defect was connected to a cavity that
bulged into the myometrium, a finding that has not yet been reported. The patient’s postmenstrual discharge resolved after surgery, and her
infertility has also resolved, as she was able to get pregnant twice out of three attempts of intrauterine insemination in spite of 3 years
of infertility prior to our intervention. Hyalinized myometrium of the cavity wall (Fig. 1g) indicates an old myometrial scar; this differs
from a true uterine diverticulum that is lined by glandular tissue [13, 14]. Our patient’s findings also differed from those of a secondary
uterine diverticulum, which is an extrauterine swelling of a severe cesarean scar defect [13, 14]. In our patient, the sacculation of
hyalinized myometrium in the right uterine sidewall encourages us to imagine that unsutured lacerations at the right edge of the myometrial
incision gave rise to the small cavity. Traditionally, the surgeon stands on the patient’s right and the right inner edge of the myometrial
incision could be a blind spot; this point has never been discussed before. Gubbini et al. analyzed 26 patients with cesarean scar defect
and reported that the defects appeared anteriorly, near the right side . They usually stand on the patient’s right as well (personal
communication), which supports our speculation. Therefore, we propose that extra attention should be paid to reduce interspaces when
suturing the inner edge of the cesarean incision at uterine closure. Furthermore, several studies have discussed closure technique of
uterine incision as a risk for cesarean scar defect, although this remains controversial [11, 16–21]. Taken together, it may be concluded
that double-layer uterine closure, especially with endometrial suturing, is the best way to prevent scar defects. The incidence of cesarean
scar defect increases with multiple cesarean sections but there may other potential risk factors . However, of all possible
risks/predisposing factors, only uterine incision closure technique can be controlled for the primary prevention, which is undoubtedly
important. Regarding her postmenstrual brown discharge, reduced contractility in the lower uterine segment might slow the drainage of
menstrual blood , or the blood could accumulate in the cavity with slow subsequent drainage . Another potential source of bleeding is the
polyps (Fig. 1e), which are found in 16 % of cesarean scar syndrome patients . Endometrial abnormalities around the defect could cause
abnormal bleeding, such as overhanging congested endometrium, fragmentation and breakdown of the endometrium , and inclusion of endometrial
tissue within the scar . Endometrial suturing at the time of uterine closure could bring endometrium into the correct position and reduce
endometrial abnormalities and abnormal bleeding, which may be an important suturing technique as mentioned above. In any event, the slow
drainage of menstrual blood must negatively affect sperm viability, sperm swim-up, and embryo implantation . In our patient, obliteration of
the cavity and removal of the polyp were thought to improve both her discharge and infertility. Therefore, even in situations e.g. in
developing area where endoscopic (minimally invasive) surgical facilities are not available, open surgery remains a reasonable option.
Although, retrospectively, the MRI and hysterosalpingography images of this case were different from a common cesarean scar defect, the
correct diagnosis was, indeed, quite difficult before surgery despite the use of transvaginal ultrasound, MRI, hysterosalpingography, and
hysteroscopy. Sonohysterography might have helped to make a more accurate diagnosis . Finally, both laparoscopy and hysteroscopy were
required to identify all aspects of this irregular defect. Regarding surgical treatment options of cesarean scar syndrome, operative
hysteroscopy, conventional or robotic-assisted laparoscopic surgery and vaginal surgery have been reported [12, 26–28]. However, we needed
both laparoscopic and hysteroscopic surgery to complete the repair. Clearly, a consistent methodology of diagnosis and treatment, taking
into consideration such atypical cases, is needed. In this report, we propose a potential treatment for atypical cesarean scar defect. As
the cesarean rate is increasing worldwide, the possibility of encountering a patient with an atypical cesarean scar defect is rising. The
gynecologists should be aware that cesarean scar syndrome can present with scar defects of atypical shapes or features. Thus the diagnostic
evaluation and therapeutic options should be carefully evaluated. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Magnetic
resonance imaging Competing interest The authors declare that they have no competing interest. Authors’ contributions HM practiced disease
management in the patient and was responsible for the concept, design and writing of the final version of the manuscript. HU, KS and SS
participated in the literature search and in selected relevant papers, and drafted manuscript. TM and MT resolved inconsistencies with
discussion and involved in revising the final draft of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like
thank Dr. Ryuichiro Sho at the Sho hospital for the patient referral.
