We report a rare case of ophthalmia nodosa, presenting as a painless swelling in the lower palpebral conjunctiva for 2 years with no signs
of inflammation. Excision biopsy confirmed the diagnosis. Ophthalmia nodosa is an inflammation precipitated by hairs of certain insects or
vegetable material, and it derives its name from the nodular conjunctival reaction that results.12 Patients usually present with a severe
reaction to the caterpillar hairs and have signs of conjunctivitis and uveitis. We report a rare case of ophthalmia nodosa incidentally
detected on routine checkup, as the patient did not have any signs of conjunctivitis or uveitis. Ophthalmia nodosa has not been reported as
an incidental finding in the literature. A 40-year-old female reported to the department of ophthalmology, with complaints of defective
vision for the past 4 years for which she was using spectacles. She also complained of a swelling in the lower palpebral conjunctiva, which
she had noted for the past 2 years. She did not report any history of foreign body sensation, redness, pain, or watering. She did not recall
any contact or injury with an insect. On examination, her best-corrected visual acuity was 6/6, J1 in both eyes. The left eye was normal.
Anterior segment evaluation of the right eye revealed a quiet eye with no signs of congestion or inflammation. A 10 mm Ã— 10 mm size nodule
was seen in the lower palpebral conjunctiva of the right eye with embedded caterpillar hairs [Figures 1 and 2]. Granulomatous lesion in the
lower palpebral conjunctiva Caterpillar hair embedded in the granuloma All visible caterpillar hairs were removed from the lesion, and
topical steroids were prescribed. However, new hair continued to appear, causing irritation. An excision biopsy of the granuloma was
performed, and the patient symptoms were relieved. Histopathology revealed focal ulceration and secondary histiocytic reaction around linear
refractile foreign bodies. No hair follicles were noted. Ophthalmia nodosa is defined as a nodular conjunctival reaction produced as an
inflammatory response to certain insects such as caterpillars or to vegetable hairs.1234 Caterpillars are the larval form of a member of the
insect order Lepidoptera, which includes butterflies and moths.3 Cadera et al.5 classified Ophthalmia nodosa into five categories: Type 1:
Acute anaphylactoid reaction to the hair which begins immediately and lasts a few days causing chemosis and inflammationType 2: Chronic
mechanical keratoconjunctivitis caused by hair which is lodged in the bulbar or palpebral conjunctiva and leads to linear corneal
abrasionsType 3: Grayish yellow granulomatous nodule formed in the conjunctiva and the hair may be subconjunctival or intracorneal, but
patients may be asymptomaticType 4: Iritis secondary to hair penetration into the anterior segment and it may become severe with iris nodule
formation and hypopyonType 5: Vitreoretinal involvement after hair penetration into the posterior segment. Type 1: Acute anaphylactoid
reaction to the hair which begins immediately and lasts a few days causing chemosis and inflammation Type 2: Chronic mechanical
keratoconjunctivitis caused by hair which is lodged in the bulbar or palpebral conjunctiva and leads to linear corneal abrasions Type 3:
Grayish yellow granulomatous nodule formed in the conjunctiva and the hair may be subconjunctival or intracorneal, but patients may be
asymptomatic Type 4: Iritis secondary to hair penetration into the anterior segment and it may become severe with iris nodule formation and
hypopyon Type 5: Vitreoretinal involvement after hair penetration into the posterior segment. The patient in this case report is Type 3
where she had a granulomatous swelling with no signs of conjunctivitis or uveitis. The differential diagnosis of an asymptomatic nodular
conjunctival lesion at this site could be dermoid or chalazion. Excision biopsy determined the absence of hair follicles, or other sebaceous
structures, as would be expected in a dermoid. In addition, the cellular reaction was not suggestive of a chalazion. Nil. There are no
conflicts of interest.
