Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is an inherited disease mainly found in young people causing malignant arrhythmias
which can result in sudden cardiac death. Due to unspecific symptoms the diagnosis of ARVC is still challenging and requires clinical
testing and expert knowledge. Genetic testing of index patients is helpful in the primary diagnosis and further testing of family members
may allow for prevention of sudden cardiac death. We report a case of newly diagnosed ARVC where genetic testing identified a novel familial
frame-shift mutation in the PKP2 gene. Screening of the family members identified both children and the father as mutation carriers
following an autosomal-dominant inheritance pattern. Our findings emphasize the importance of genetic family screening after the
identification of a causative mutation in an index case. Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a hereditary cardiac
disease that predominantly affects the right and possibly the left ventricle and is pathologically characterized by progressive fibrofatty
replacement of myocardium . Clinically cardiac rhythm, i.e., palpitations, syncope and sudden cardiac death (SCD), or cardiac function,
i.e., right- or bi-ventricular heart failure resembling dilated cardiomyopathy, may be affected. The diagnosis is based on the 2010 Task
Force criteria including characteristic electrocardiographic, arrhythmic, structural and/or histological abnormalities . The prevalence is
estimated to be 1:1000 to 1:5000 with a mean age at diagnosis of 31 years (±13; range 4–64 years) . ARVC is acknowledged to be a leading
cause of ventricular arrhythmias and SCD in young, often athletic subjects below the age of 35 years [1, 2]. As much as 30 – 50 % of ARVC
patients have a positive family history and ARVC most commonly follows an autosomal-dominant inheritance. However, incomplete penetrance and
highly variable and age-dependent disease expression are observed . A 43-year-old female presented with shortness of breath, chest
discomfort and light-headedness while cross-country skiing. She was able to call the rescue service herself and upon arrival they detected a
wide QRS complex tachycardia with left bundle branch block morphology and inferior axis at 190 bpm that was terminated by administration of
50 mg Ajmalin i.v. (Fig. 1a). In stable condition the patient was transferred to our emergency room for further evaluation. Medical history
included repeated episodes of similar symptoms upon physical exertion, yet no syncope. The family history was remarkable of a survived
sudden cardiac arrest of the patient’s father at the age of 86 years and recurrent syncopes during exercise of the patient’s daughter.Fig. 1
a 12-Lead ECG of the index patient (paper speed 25 mm/s) showing ventricular tachycardia with left bundle branch block morphology and
inferior axis. b Resting 12-Lead ECG upon admission to our hospital showing sinus rhythm (paper speed 50 mm/s). T-wave inversion is present
in V1-V4 a 12-Lead ECG of the index patient (paper speed 25 mm/s) showing ventricular tachycardia with left bundle branch block morphology
and inferior axis. b Resting 12-Lead ECG upon admission to our hospital showing sinus rhythm (paper speed 50 mm/s). T-wave inversion is
present in V1-V4 The resting 12-lead ECG displayed T-wave inversion in leads V1-4 in the absence of bundle branch block configuration
(Fig. 1b). Laboratory analysis showed mildly elevated troponin T. Echocardiography showed normal size and function of the left ventricle.
However, the right ventricle (RV) was significantly enlarged with reduced function (Fig. 2a). Cardiac MRI displayed a reduced RV ejection
fraction of 27 % with moderate RV enlargement and increased RV end-diastolic volume (128 ml) (Fig. 2b, c), as well as akinesia of the apical
RV posterior wall with late enhancement in this area (Fig. 2d). The coronary angiogram was normal. 12 lead-Holter monitoring revealed
numerous premature ectopic ventricular beats (>7000) and three episodes of sustained ventricular tachycardia around 200 bpm the longest
lasting over 20 min with left bundle branch block configuration originating from the RV outflow tract (RVOT). In the electrophysiological
study, 3D electroanatomic voltage mapping showed low voltage areas in the apical and basal inferior RV as well as the lateral and medial RV
outflow tract. Isoproterenol infusion as well as programmed ventricular stimulation induced the clinically documented ventricular
tachycardia (VT) as well as 3 other forms of RV-VT. Radiofrequency energy ablation guided by voltage and activation mapping successfully
eliminated all induced VTs and reached non-inducibility of ventricular arrhythmias. Taken together the definite clinical diagnosis of late-
onset arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) was made according to the modified Task Force criteria by Marcus et al. . The
patient fulfilled two major criteria of ARVC (MRI pathology, repolarization abnormalities) and one minor criterion (arrhythmia).Fig. 2 a
Echocardiography of index patient shows dilatation of the right ventricle. RVD1 (basal right ventricle): 42.5 mm (Mean value (95 % CI) 33
(31–35 mm)). RVD2 (mid right ventricle) 32.7 mm (Mean value (95 % CI) 28 (23–33 mm)). RVD3 (base to apex length) 58.6 mm (Mean value (95 %
CI) 71 (67–75 mm)). Mean values (95 % CI) according to Rudski et al. . b Cardiac MRI of the index patient reveals moderate enlargement of
the right ventricle with an enddiastolic volume of 186 ml (standard value female 140 ± 37 ml) and (c) endsystolic volume of 135 ml (standard
value female 52 ± 22 ml) resulting in a highly reduced ejection fraction of 27 % (standard value female 64 ± 7 %) Furthermore, the apical
posterior wall of the right ventricle showed akinesia and (d) late gadolinium enhancement identified apical fibrosis (yellow arrows) in the
4-chamber view. Standard values according to Hudsmith et al. a Echocardiography of index patient shows dilatation of the right ventricle.
RVD1 (basal right ventricle): 42.5 mm (Mean value (95 % CI) 33 (31–35 mm)). RVD2 (mid right ventricle) 32.7 mm (Mean value (95 % CI) 28
(23–33 mm)). RVD3 (base to apex length) 58.6 mm (Mean value (95 % CI) 71 (67–75 mm)). Mean values (95 % CI) according to Rudski et al. . b
Cardiac MRI of the index patient reveals moderate enlargement of the right ventricle with an enddiastolic volume of 186 ml (standard value
female 140 ± 37 ml) and (c) endsystolic volume of 135 ml (standard value female 52 ± 22 ml) resulting in a highly reduced ejection fraction
of 27 % (standard value female 64 ± 7 %) Furthermore, the apical posterior wall of the right ventricle showed akinesia and (d) late
gadolinium enhancement identified apical fibrosis (yellow arrows) in the 4-chamber view. Standard values according to Hudsmith et al. During
the following days ventricular tachycardia could neither be recorded in repeated Holter monitoring nor induced by controlled exercise stress
testing. Nevertheless, we recommended the implantation of an automated implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) for secondary prophylaxis of
sudden cardiac death, which was initially refused by the patient. The patient agreed, however, to conduct genetic testing of common ARVC
genes for eventual substantiation of the diagnosis. While DNA exon sequencing of the ARVC genes desmoglein 2 (DSG2), desmoplakin (DSP),
ryanodine receptor 2 (RYR2), transmembrane protein 43 (TMEM43), desmocollin 2 (DSC2), junction plakoglobin (JUP) and transforming growth
factor beta 3 (TGFB3) showed no pathological findings, sequencing of the plakophilin-2 (PKP2) gene identified a new variant in exon 7
(performed at the Synlab, Mannheim, Germany). This heterozygous c1664delT deletion mutation has not yet been described in the literature
(HGMD Professional 2014.1). However, a pathogenic effect of this mutation is very likely, since the frame-shift p.F555Sfs*8 prematurely
terminates translation which probably leads to degradation of RNA or composition of an altered protein (Fig. 3a, b). Both mechanisms would
result in loss of function of the mutated allele. Confronted with this result, the patient agreed to the ICD implantation and a single-
chamber ICD was successfully implanted. In the 6-months follow-up no sustained or non-sustained ventricular tachycardia was recorded in the
ICD memory.Fig. 3Electropherogram curves and sequences of (a) the wildtype sequence and (b) the index patient: The index patient shows the
frameshift mutation c.1664delT (p.F555Sfs*8) in the PKP2-gene. c Pedigree of the index patient (II.2) displaying an autosomal dominant
inheritance pattern. Her father (I.2) is also diagnosed with ARVC and both children (III.1 and III.2) are mutation carriers, the son (III.2)
fulfills the 2010 Task Force criteria of ARVC and is diagnosed with the disease Electropherogram curves and sequences of (a) the wildtype
sequence and (b) the index patient: The index patient shows the frameshift mutation c.1664delT (p.F555Sfs*8) in the PKP2-gene. c Pedigree of
the index patient (II.2) displaying an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Her father (I.2) is also diagnosed with ARVC and both
children (III.1 and III.2) are mutation carriers, the son (III.2) fulfills the 2010 Task Force criteria of ARVC and is diagnosed with the
disease Predictive genetic testing of first-degree family members of the index patient for the new PKP2 mutation disclosed the familial
heterozygous mutation in both children (ages 13 and 16) and the father of the patient. Neither her mother, nor her sister and her aunt were
carriers of the mutation (Fig. 3c, Table 1). All carriers of the mutation underwent a comprehensive cardiological work-up including 12-lead
ECG, exercise stress test, Holter monitoring, echocardiography and MRI of the heart (performed at Deutsches Herzzentrum München,
Universitätsklinikum München-Großhadern, Germany).Table 1Results of genetic testing and clinical criteria (major, minor) for the diagnosis
of ARVC of the index patient and the tested family members. According to the 2010 Task Force criteria diagnosis of ARVC can be made by
presence of the following criteria: 2 major criteria or 1 major?+?2 minor criteria or 4 minor criteria (from different categories) . The
criteria for diagnosis were fulfilled in the index patient (II.2), her father (I.2) and her son (III.2), all marked in blue. RV right
ventricle; in brackets number of criteria present Results of genetic testing and clinical criteria (major, minor) for the diagnosis of ARVC
of the index patient and the tested family members. According to the 2010 Task Force criteria diagnosis of ARVC can be made by presence of
the following criteria: 2 major criteria or 1 major?+?2 minor criteria or 4 minor criteria (from different categories) . The criteria for
diagnosis were fulfilled in the index patient (II.2), her father (I.2) and her son (III.2), all marked in blue. RV right ventricle; in
brackets number of criteria present The daughter showed an orthostatic reaction after stress testing resulting in dizziness and pre-syncopy
but no arrhythmias were detected during this episode. At present, the remaining cardiological examinations were normal. The son presented
with an epsilon potential in lead V1 in the resting ECG. The results of all other tests showed currently no abnormal findings. Nevertheless,
with two major criteria being present, ARVC was diagnosed in the son. Both children were recommended to refrain from excessive physical
exercise and to perform semi-annual cardiologic check-ups. The 91-year old father of the index patient, currently still in good health, had
a long-standing medical history of cardiac diseases, including sick sinus syndrome, implantation of a biologic aortic valve at the age of 81
and one episode of ventricular tachycardia that was successfully terminated with i.v. amiodarone at the age of 86, when he declined the
implantation of an ICD. Echocardiography showed significant dilatation of the right ventricle with severely reduced function (TAPSE = 7 mm).
Upon MRI the right ventricular ejection fraction was severely reduced (20 %) with akinesia and fibrosis of the lateral wall. Therefore, the
diagnosis of ARVC was made. We report a case of a 43-year old female with newly diagnosed ARVC in whom genetic testing identified a novel
frame-shift mutation in the PKP2 gene. Although the clinical diagnosis was established according to the 2010 Task Force criteria, the
patient was reluctant to undergo ICD implantation, since she had not suffered from severe symptoms and felt that the intervention posed a
substantial change to her daily life. In our case genetic testing was able to substantiate the diagnosis by the finding of a new frame-shift
mutation in the PKP2 gene and to convince the patient of the need for the ICD implantation. Moreover, a comprehensive family screening
detected the mutation in both of her children and her father following an autosomal-dominant inheritance. The disease was also present in an
advanced state in the father, and diagnosed in an early asymptomatic stage in the son, whereas the daughter had currently normal test
results. While no sensible medical recommendations arose for the nonagenarian father, the teenage children of the patient are now confronted
with the fact that they are asymptomatic disease and mutation carriers respectively. As a result, lifestyle modifications such as restraint
from exhausting physical activity and cardiologic check-ups on a regular basis are warranted. According to the Heart Rhythm Society/European
Heart Rhythm Association’s Expert Consensus Statement genetic testing in ARVC can be useful for patients satisfying the 2010 Task Force
diagnostic criteria and may be considered for patients with possible ARVC (1 major or 2 minor criteria), while it is not recommended for
patients with only a single minor criterion. Mutation-specific genetic testing is recommended for family members after the identification of
a causative mutation in an index case . To date, mutations in eight genes are known to cause the disease (PKP2, DSG2, DSP, DSC2, RYR2,
TGFB3, JUP, TMEM43), with six of them encoding for proteins with importance for desmosomal structure or function (PKP2, DSG2, DSP, DSC2,
JUP, TMEM43) . Mutations in PKP2 are most common ranging from 10 – 78 % in ARVC patients [6, 7]. The overall yield of a current generation
genetic test for a patient with the clinical diagnosis of ARVC approximates 50 % . However, the frequency of rare variants in ARVC
susceptibility genes in healthy volunteers, the so-called background rate of genetic variability, is estimated with 16 %, meaning that 1 in
6 healthy individuals would meet current criteria for a positive ARVC genetic test result . Understanding the genetic variability including
the importance of the genetic background mutation rate is important for the interpretation of a genetic test result. For comparison, in
long-QT syndrome the rate of “mutations” without clinical phenotype in the three most frequently involved genes KCNQ1, KCNH2, and SCN5A is
only 5 % . Ideally, patients should be referred to specialized centers to perform the genetic test and test results have to be interpreted
in light of clinical test results. Moreover, mutation characteristics seem to play a role in determining the probability of pathogenicity.
Kapplinger et al. found that radical mutations in ARVC susceptibility genes, such as in-frame and frame-shift insertions and deletions,
splice junction, and nonsense mutations, are strongly associated with the disease (42.9 % in ARVC cases vs. 0.47 % in healthy controls,
p < 9.8 × 10−44), whereas rare missense mutations are less likely to be related to ARVC and should be interpreted in the context of race and
ethnicity, mutation location, and sequence conservation . Radical mutations, as the frame-shift mutation in our patient, are found in
approximately ¾ of mutation-positive ARVC cases . Despite the deleterious nature of this novel frame-shift mutation on the gene product the
age of diagnosis in our patient and that of her father in particular is high. One can speculate whether this specific mutation goes along
with a late-onset of symptoms and is comparatively “benign”, or whether other factors, such as genetic background and external influences
(e.g., physical activity) affect the course of the disease. However, it is known that the presentation of ARVC can be highly variable even
within families, which is of particular importance for the patient’s clinically asymptomatic children with positive genetic testing in whom
preventive measures should be taken. In general our case suggests that genetic evaluation in ARVC can be helpful to establish the definite
diagnosis and to influence clinical decision making, but should be viewed as one component of comprehensive clinical assessment and never
replace clinical judgment. We report a case of newly diagnosed ARVC where genetic testing identified a novel familial frame-shift mutation
in the PKP2 gene. Although not meant to override clinical judgment, the case shows that in index cases genetic testing can be helpful to
establish the definite diagnosis and to guide treatment considerations. Among family members mutation-specific genetic cascade screening has
diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic implications. Interpretation of test results for ARVC is challenging and referring patients to
specialty centers is strongly encouraged. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and all family members for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal.
Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC) desmocollin 2 desmoglein 2 desmoplakin junction plakoglobin plakophilin-2 ryanodine
receptor 2 tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion transforming growth factor beta 3 transmembrane protein 43 Competing interests None of
the authors have any competing interests to declare. Authors’ contributions WR, ID and HS provided clinical consultation. TT and WR analyzed
the data and drafted the manuscript. MH and ID contributed clinical data. ID and HS helped to draft and revised the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. We thank the patient and the patient’s family to allow us to publish their clinical case. We would
also like to thank Frau Dr. Britt-Maria Beckmann from the Universitätsklinikum München-Großhadern, who provided us clinical information of
the two children of the index patient.
