Dear Editor, Ascorbic acid interferes with certain clinical chemistry assays based on peroxidase and redox indicators . Ascorbic acid is
reported to interfere with the measurement of glucose, total cholesterol, triglycerides, and uric acid . We recently encountered several
cases of interference from ascorbic acid in serum total cholesterol assays based on colorimetric enzymatic reactions. A 48-yr-old-female
with recurrent ovarian cancer underwent palliative segmental resection surgery of the small intestine. The patient showed progressive renal
impairment following surgery, and total cholesterol level was <3 mg/dL, as measured using the OSR6516 total cholesterol assay (Beckman
Coulter, Brea, CA, USA) on an AU5800 analyzer (Beckman Coulter). We repeated the test with the same sample, using the Pureauto S CHO-N total
cholesterol assay (Sekisui Medical Co., Tokyo, Japan) on a Hitachi7600 analyzer (Hitachi Co., Tokyo, Japan) and observed a concentration of
121 mg/dL. We did not repeat the OSR6516 assay after a certain period. The specimen was checked for lipemic, hemolytic, and icteric indices
to rule out other possible interferents. The patient was administered 30 g of ascorbic acid intravenously daily for 22 days prior to total
cholesterol measurements. Dipstick analysis of the patient's urine was performed by using an URiSCAN SUPER analyzer (YD Diagnostics, Seoul,
Korea), which showed a value of 2+ (equivalent to 25 mg/dL) for ascorbic acid. Three additional cases characterized by spuriously low total
cholesterol values owing to ascorbic acid interference are summarized in Table 1. Although we could not determine serum ascorbic acid
levels, we detected its presence by using a urine dipstick assay in three of the four cases. Several studies recommend the addition of
ascorbate oxidase to minimize ascorbic acid interference in assays to assess uric acid, triglyceride, oxalate, and cholesterol . Most
cholesterol assays in clinical laboratories use an enzymatic colorimetric method with the Trinder end-point reaction, in which hydrogen
peroxide reacts with a chromogen via peroxidase to form a colored product; absorbance of this product is proportional to the concentration
of total cholesterol in the sample . Ascorbic acid interferes with peroxidase-based oxidation of the chromogen . Since dehydroascorbic acid
is already oxidized and has lost its reducing power, interference via ascorbic acid can be successfully prevented. Commercially available
total cholesterol assays are summarized in Table 2. Ascorbate oxidase included in the Sekisui total cholesterol assay effectively converts
serum ascorbic acid (up to concentrations of 50 mg/dL) to dehydroascorbic acid. Since ascorbic acid rapidly auto-oxidizes over time, it is
difficult to detect its interference in cholesterol measurements . Reviewing medical records can also be problematic; some ascorbic acid
supplements are not physician-prescribed but are readily available over-the-counter. Furthermore, it is difficult to predict serum ascorbic
acid concentrations based on ingested doses of ascorbic acid in patients with impaired renal function. Artiss et al. suggested that we can
exclude ascorbate oxidase in wet-chemistry reagent systems for cholesterol determination because solvated ascorbic acid is subject to air
oxidation. Thus, the interfering substance is oxidized prior to analysis by laboratory instruments. This is partly true for most samples
from patients whose renal function is intact and for those consuming typical ascorbic acid doses. It might be particularly problematic for
patients with impaired renal function or for those taking high ascorbic acid doses. In the second case (Table 1), we presumed that this low
cholesterol level was likely due to ascorbic acid accumulation in the blood owing to impaired renal function, even though the prescribed
dose of ascorbic acid was not high. As all of our cases showed extremely low total cholesterol levels, the laboratory technician easily
noticed analytical errors and tried to troubleshoot them before reporting the results. These problems occurred in approximately one case
bimonthly and were reported to managers and documented. However, interference from low concentrations of ascorbic acid causes a small
negative bias in total cholesterol levels, which may go unnoticed. Ascorbic acid is one of the most widely consumed nutritional supplements,
and some physicians prescribe megadoses for cancer therapy . Consequently, managers of clinical laboratories should consider the use of
cholesterol assays that include ascorbate oxidase. In conclusion, when colorimetric enzymatic assays detect inappropriately low levels of
total cholesterol, we should suspect ascorbic acid interference. Addition of ascorbate oxidase to cholesterol reagents can minimize the
inference of ascorbic acid in total cholesterol assays. Authors' Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of Interest: No potential conflicts of
interest relevant to this article were reported. *eGFR was calculated by using 2009 Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-
EPI) creatinine equations currently recommended by The National Kidney Foundation. No patients had dialysis history; †OSR6516 Cholesterol
assay (Beckman Coulter, Inc., Brea, CA, USA) on the AU5800 Clinical Chemistry System (Beckman Coulter, Inc.); ‡CHOL2 (Roche Diagnostics
GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) assay on the Cobas c701 Analyzer (Roche Diagnostics GmbH); §Time interval between the most recent ascorbic acid
administration and total cholesterol measurement; ∥Pureauto S CHO-N (Sekisui Medical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) assay on the Hitachi 7600
Analyzer (Hitachi Co., Tokyo, Japan); ¶The urine dipstick analyses for cases 1, 3, and 4 were performed using the URiSCAN SUPER analyzer (YD
Diagnostics, Seoul, Korea). In the urine dipstick analysis for ascorbic acid, -, 1+, 2+, and 3+ are equivalent to ascorbic acid
concentrations of negative, 10 mg/dL, 25 mg/dL, and 50 mg/dL, respectively; **Time interval between total cholesterol measurement and urine
analysis; ††Since the ascorbic acid item is not included in the CLINITEK Novus (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics Inc., Erlangen, Germany)
urine dipstick analysis strip, the urine ascorbic acid concentration of the patient from case 2 could not be measured. Abbreviations: eGFR,
estimated glomerular filtration rate; F, female; M, male; PO, per os or oral administration; IV, intravenously; N/A, not available. *The
total cholesterol assays listed are all based on colorimetric enzymatic reactions with the Trinder reaction end-point.
