Acute neonatal appendicitis is very rare in the neonatal period. It is usually associated with comorbidity including prematurity. Symptoms
are non-specific. The prognosis is marked by high risk of mortality and morbidity. Here, we report a case of preterm new born who presented
with sepsis, apnoea, and digestive signs. The laparotomy revealed perforated appendicitis complicated with peritonitis. Few cases of acute
appendicitis have been reported in the neonatal period. Less than 50 cases in the last 30 years were documented. The incidence of acute
appendicitis ranges from 0.04% to 0.2%. Its infrequency and its non-specific symptoms are responsible for difficulties of diagnosis and
delayed adequate intervention. Its outcome is marked by rapid progression to perforation and peritonitis. It tends to occur in premature
infants, and it is commonly associated with comorbidity. All these findings are a source of poor prognosis and high mortality. Preterm baby
boy was born by vaginal delivery at 32 weeks of gestation, to a 28-year-old primigravida mother. Antenatal steroids were given for premature
rupture of membranes and spontaneous labour. Apgar was 9–10, and the examination was normal at birth. Birth weight was 1800 g and head
circumference 30, 5 cm. He was admitted in the neonatal intensive care unit, and he was orally fed. He received antibiotics for elevated
procalcitonin (0.45 ng/ml). On day 1, he presented fever (38.5°C) with screeches. C-reactive protein (CRP) was 77 mg/L, white blood cell
(WBC) were 4,81 x 109/l and lumbar puncture was normal. Haemoculture was positive for the Gram-negative bacillus. On day 2, he was intubated
for severe apnoea, altered hemodynamic status and painful, distended and contractured abdomen. The volume of the gastric residual was large,
but the appearance was clear. Stools were regular and normal. The abdominal X-ray, and the ultrasound showed non-abnormal signs. CRP
increased to 155 mg/L. In the blood count, WBC was normal, but thrombocytopenia was noticed. The decision was exploratory laparotomy.
Intraoperative findings revealed perforated appendicitis with peritonitis. Appendectomy and peritoneal lavage with warm saline were
performed. The outcome was favourable. Histopathology confirmed the diagnosis and did not show signs of Hirschprung's disease. The follow-up
at 5 months of age was reassuring. Acute neonatal appendicitis occurs in males in 75% of cases; and in 25 to 50% of the time it involves a
preterm infant. Coexisting pathologic states are usually found: Prematurity, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), cytomegalovirus enterocolitis,
mucormycosis, maternal chorioamnionitis, cardiopulmonary failure, hyaline membrane disease, inguinal hernia (amyand's hernia) (33%),
Hirschprung's disease, cystic fibrosis, meconium plug syndrome, Down's syndrome, and congenital ureteropelvic junction obstruction.
Symptomatology in acute neonatal appendicitis is non-specific, and the presentation can be identical to NEC. In fact, most common clinical
features reported in the literature were abdominal distention (90% of cases) and vomiting (40-60 %). Other symptoms included abdominal
tenderness (37%), irritability (40%), temperature instability (32%), anorexia (42%), sepsis (28%), and respiratory signs (15%). In some
cases, no digestive signs were found, and the patient's physical examination was limited. This misleading and atypical symptomatology makes
the diagnosis difficult since there is also often comorbidity. The routine investigations are not contributory to the diagnosis. Abdominal
X-ray may be helpful when it shows free peritoneal air leading to early surgery. Ultrasound seems to be more effective, but it has
limitations when the appendix is retrocecal or perforated. Although there has been a reduction in mortality over the last century, it
remained as high as 28%. It is mainly due to the delayed surgical intervention since the recognition of the disease is difficult. Indeed,
all cases reported were diagnosed at laparotomy or autopsy. Management consists of simple appendectomy and peritoneal lavage with warm
saline. Hirschprung's disease must always be ruled out on histopathology. Although acute appendicitis is the most common surgical condition
of childhood, it is seldom evoked in the neonatal period. Considering it in the differential diagnosis of abdominal distention in the
newborn allow precocious and adequate management leading to a better prognosis. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
