Several oral and maxillofacial surgery procedures require the simultaneous use of the oropharyngeal space by both the surgeons and the
anaesthetists. This poses a lot of challenges especially in optimally securing the airway. Nasotracheal intubation or tracheostomy with
their significant morbidity might even be contraindicated in these scenarios owing to several factors elucidated in the literature.
Submental endotracheal intubation might be the last resort in adequately protecting the airway without interfering with the surgery. It also
permits concurrent access to the dental occlusion and nasal pyramid without the risk associated with nasal intubation and morbidity of
tracheostomy. Contraindications include patients who require long periods of assisted ventilation and a severe traumatic wound on the floor
of the mouth. Complications include localised infection and sepsis, poor wound healing or scarring, and post-operative salivary fistula. The
rationale for this study is to describe the indications, contraindications and the technique of submental endotracheal intubation as
performed in our hospital. Several oral and maxillofacial surgeries require the simultaneous use of the oropharyngeal space by both the
surgeons and the anaesthetists. This competition for the upper airway space poses a lot of challenges for safely securing the airway with
conventional orotracheal intubation while achieving optimal delivery of general anaesthesia. Moreover, the management of maxillofacial
fractures with maxillomandibular fixation either as a temporary or permanent measure in securing occlusion and fracture alignment makes
orotracheal intubation unsuitable. Several alternatives to orotracheal intubation exist, which include the submental, nasotracheal,
retromandibular and tracheostomy routes, with or without the use of fibre optics. However, not all are suitable for all cases of paediatric
maxillofacial surgery. Nasotracheal intubation may be contraindicated owing to concurrent nasal or skull base fractures, while tracheostomy
requires special surgical expertise, facilities and adequate post-operative care which might not be readily available in a resource
constrained environment. In addition, the airway in children is small and very reactive. The submental route is a viable alternative to
both. Therefore, submental endotracheal intubation offers adequate protection of the airway without any interference in the conduct of the
surgery. It also permits concurrent access to the dental occlusion and nasal pyramid without the risk associated with nasal intubation and
morbidity of tracheostomy. Contraindications include patients who require long periods of assisted ventilation and a severe traumatic wound
on the floor of the mouth. Although Caron et al., in their case series, reported its use post-operatively for a mean duration of 5.2 days
(range, 1-24 days). However, two of their patients representing 8% of the cases reported required a tracheostomy because of prolonged
respiratory failure. Complications include localised infection and sepsis, poor wound healing or scarring and post-operative salivary
fistula. The retromolar intubation technique first described by Bonfils in 1983 has been used in maxillofacial surgery. This involves the
passage of the tube through the space between the distal part of the last molar and the anterior part of the ascending ramus of the mandible
across the alveolar margin. While this technique is simple, atraumatic, fast and allows intraoperative monitoring of the dental occlusion
while keeping the tube patent, it may be a great challenge passing it through the retromolar space in adults due to the possible presence of
the mandibular third molar and attendant unpredictability of the space availability. Furthermore, the surgical field may also be compromised
especially in cases such as bilateral sagittal split osteotomy and the space occupied by the tube may interfere with the application of
dental fixation devices. There is a paucity of reports of the use of this intubation technique in Nigeria and particularly the Northwest
region. Hence, we present reports of the three cases in which this technique was used. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first of
such study from our centre. The indications, contraindications and the technique of submental endotracheal intubation as performed in our
hospital are outlined. A 5-year-old female presented at our centre with 8 months history of right lower jaw swelling. Clinical examination
demonstrated a bony hard swelling extended from the body of the right mandible along the ramus up to the tragus. Intraorally, there was a
buccolingual expansion with derangement of occlusion. Following histopathology, a diagnosis of odontogenic fibromyxoma was made. Right
hemimandibulectomy under general anaesthesia was planned. Nasotracheal intubation was unsuccessfully attempted. The submental intubation
technique rather than tracheostomy was opted for, after discussion with the anaesthetists [Figures 1 and 2]. This was uneventful and patient
successfully extubated following surgery. No post-operative complication was experienced. Submental intubation in place Submental intubation
in place (note the pronounced right facial swelling) A 9-year-old male presented with 4 months history of left recurrent swelling of the
floor of the mouth. Clinical examination showed a soft, translucent swelling of the left floor of the mouth which raised the tongue on that
side. The left submandibular gland was not ballotable on manual palpation. A clinical diagnosis of ranula (extravasation mucocele) was made.
Subsequently, excisional biopsy under general anaesthesia was planned. Nasotracheal intubation could not be attempted owing to intubation
challenges. Orotracheal intubation was successfully combined with the submental route on the contralateral side. Thereafter, excision of the
ranula with the right sublingual gland was performed. Recovery and healing were uneventful with no post-operative complication recorded. A
16-year-old female was referred to our unit by an otorhinolaryngologist with 3 years history of right mandibular ramus swelling. She had
been managed earlier with antibiotics for recurrent parotitis. On examination, there was right facial asymmetry secondary to a tender bony
hard swelling of the right mandibular ramus. Intraorally, there was a buccal expansion of the right ramus without derangement of occlusion
and involvement of the mucosa. Following histopathology, a diagnosis of ossifying fibroma was made. Excision under general anaesthesia was
planned. Following unsuccessful nasotracheal intubation, submental intubation technique rather than tracheostomy was adopted in consensus
with the anaesthetists. Recovery and healing were uneventful with no post-operative complication witnessed. A 14-year-old male presented at
our clinic with malocclusion secondary to a malunited Le Fort I maxillary fracture which he sustained following involvement in road traffic
accident about 3 days prior to the presentation. He also had a hypertrophic scar measuring about 2 cm extending longitudinally from the
floor of the left nostril to the white roll. Examination revealed premature contact of the left maxillary segment and anterior down rotation
of the right maxillary segment. In addition, there was avulsion of the upper left central incisor and Ellis class 8 fracture of the upper
left lateral incisor. A diagnosis of maxillary bone malunion was made. The patient had Le Fort I osteotomy done to reduce the fracture and
thereafter had stainless steel wire intermaxillary fixation done. Initially, the conventional orotracheal intubation was done, which was
then converted to submental intubation in order to monitor occlusion intraoperatively as well as to achieve intermaxillary fixation without
compromising the airway. Submental intubation offered satisfactory access to the mandibulomaxillary and nasal complexes while also affording
us the chance of placing intermaxillary wire fixation while maintaining the airway. Post-operative recovery was uneventful, and there were
no complications noted. The airway was secured through orotracheal intubation followed by a 1.5-2.0 cm long paramedian skin incision made in
the submental region, just medial to the lower border of the mandible, that is, behind the parasymphyseal region. An orocutaneous tunnel
(extra-periosteal) large enough to allow the passage of the appropriate sized endotracheal (regular or reinforced armoured flexometallic
preferred) tube was created with blunt dissection by passing a medium-sized needle holder through the skin incision into the floor of the
oral cavity traversing the subcutaneous fat, platysma, investing layer of deep cervical fascia, anterior bellies of digastric, mylohyoid,
geniohyoid, genioglossus and sublingual mucosa [Figure 3]. Adequate exposure of the mouth was maintained with a mouth gag. Medium sized
needle holder introduced through the submental incision Consecutively, the endotracheal tube was disconnected from the ventilatory circuit
with the universal connector removed and the open end of the tube was held with the needle holder. It was pulled extraorally through the
wound along with the inflatable balloon while concurrently being anchored in place by an assistant, to prevent accidental extubation. Before
re-attaching the connector, the open end of the tube was suctioned free of blood, and other substances and then the tracheal tube
reconnected to the breathing circuit [Figure 4]. Direct laryngoscopy, bilateral breath sounds and capnography (end-tidal CO2) were used to
confirm the appropriate placing of the orotracheal tube and then the cuff was re-inflated. Careful monitoring of haemodynamic parameters and
SpO2 was made during the changeover period. Submental tube in-situ Extraorally, the tube was secured in place with 1-0 black silk suture and
Elastoplast was used as reinforcement to prevent accidental displacement of the tube during manipulation of the mandible (Figure 4). Gauze
throat pack was inserted in all the cases. Peak airway pressure was satisfactory throughout the procedure. Following, the ends of
procedures, the anchor sutures were removed and the tube disconnected and reconverted retrograde back into orotracheal intubation via the
submental route. The skin incision was then sutured, and successful extubation was achieved either immediately in the operating theatre or
in the post-recovery room [Figure 5]. No prolonged post-operative mechanical ventilation was required, and there was no significant post-
operative intubation-related problems observed. Skin sutures were removed post-operatively on day 5 or 7 and patients followed up. No
complication or untoward incident was observed till discharge. Sutured submental incision Hernadenz Altemir in 1986 first described and
introduced submental intubation as an option in the management of difficult airway in oral and maxillofacial surgery. It's use has also been
applied in our own environment. Submental intubation has been heralded as a simple, secure and effective procedure for operative airway
control in major maxillofacial traumas and it allows practitioners to avoid the risk of epistaxis, iatrogenic meningitis or trauma of the
anterior skull base which may follow nasotracheal intubation. The technique of submental intubation may be modified to the submandibular
approach, and scars from the submental incision are thought to be less visible than a tracheostomy scar and is adjudged to be well tolerated
by patients. Apart from tracheostomy and submental intubation, the retromolar intubation technique was also proposed for use in these cases,
but this technique involves more time, with removal of bone from the retromolar region for making space for the endotracheal tube. In
addition, damage to the lingual nerve is greatly increased by this technique. Indications for submentotracheal intubation have been
extensively described in the literature. This include midfacial and panfacial fractures, orthognathic surgery, rhinoplasty, facial aesthetic
surgery, skull based surgery, craniofacial cleft, closure of palatal fistula using tongue flap and others. Although, we did not cover the
tube with a surgical glove finger as described in the literature, no incidence of any untoward effect of not covering the tube was observed.
It must be noted, however, that the tube was suctioned satisfactorily before re-connecting to the breathing circuit. Although, some lesions
might cross the midline necessitating placing the tube laterally on the floor of the mouth, anterior to the masseter and medial to the body
of mandible (paramedian) rather than going strictly through the submental triangle. None of our cases required this modification. In
addition, this technique avoids the complications associated with tracheostomy such as tissue emphysema, pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum,
blockage or displacement of the cannula, tracheitis, tracheal stenosis, tracheoesophageal fistula and sometimes death. Furthermore,
tracheostomy requires maintenance and has a slow learning curve. Fiberoptic intubation is an option for securing the airway in these
patients, but it requires special training and equipment, which is a challenge in a resource limited environment like ours. Submental
intubation is an easier procedure with lower morbidity that allows free intraoperative access intraorally. It also avoids haemostatic
difficulties often encountered with tracheostomy, although excessive bleeding may be encountered with the paramedian incision, this may be
avoided with the midline incision where dissection may be carried through the relatively avascular space between the two bellies of the
mylohyoid and the anterior bellies of the digastric muscles. Furthermore, it avoids scarring by hiding the scar in the submental region.
Submental intubation is a viable alternative to tracheostomy and other airway management techniques. It is simple, safe, fast and prevents
accidental intracranial placement of an endotracheal tube in skull base fractures. It also allows unfettered access to the nasal pyramid and
the dental arches. Thus, it is a viable adjunct in the management of paediatric patients with maxillofacial lesions who do not require
prolonged post-surgical ventilatory support. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
