There are only a few reports of the co-occurrence of acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis (APGN) and acute rheumatic fever. We report
an unusual case of a 3-year-old boy with nephrotic syndrome and acute renal failure with the transitional need for peritoneal dialysis,
biopsy-proven atypical IgA-dominant APGN, and concomitant acute rheumatic fever, successfully treated by steroids. Aggressive treatment with
pulses of methylprednisolone proved to be successful and we recommend its use in this type of cases. Acute poststreptococcal
glomerulonephritis (APGN) and acute rheumatic fever (ARF) are well-known nonsuppurative complications of group A streptococcus infection,
but they rarely co-occur in the same child (1-3). The cases in children were mostly treated by furosemide and salicylate, and benzathine
penicillin prophylaxis, and one case was successfully treated by oral prednisolone (2). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case
of IgA-dominant APGN manifesting as acute kidney injury due to a rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, consequent renal failure, and the
need for transitional peritoneal dialysis, co-occurring with ARF in a small child, which was successfully treated with pulse
methylprednisolone therapy. The patient was born at 40 weeks of gestation after an uneventful pregnancy. He had a rotavirus infection at
nine months and urinary tract infection at the age of two years. His mother had a history of mild asthma and pollen allergy. Informed
consent for writing of this case report was obtained from patient’s parents. The 3-year-old boy became febrile four days before admission to
the hospital. He had dark urine, complained of pain in his right knee, and started to limp. His first laboratory findings showed an increase
in C-reactive protein (32 mg/L, N<8), leukocytes 12.7 × 109/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 15.9 mmol/L (N 2.8-7.5), and creatinine 115 umol/L
(N 44-97). Urine analysis showed proteinuria (dipstick 3+) and blood (3+) in the urine. Three weeks before admission, he had acute
tonsillopharyngitis with fever, which resolved spontaneously without antibiotic treatment. A few days before his episode of acute
tonsillopharyngitis, his mother had the same symptoms and was treated with penicillin. On admission, he had signs of mild respiratory
infection with a hyperemic pharynx. He had no signs of edema. Blood pressure was normal (107/45 mm Hg), as well as auscultation of the lungs
and heart. He was febrile during the first two days of hospitalization, and showed signs of nephritic syndrome (oliguria, azotemia with
increased creatinine, hematuria, and proteinuria). During hospitalization, his blood pressure remained normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (56 mm/h) was increased. He developed signs of nephrotic syndrome (hypoproteinemia 48 g/L [N 65-80], hypoalbuminemia 27 g/L [N 32-55],
hyperlipemia [cholesterol 7.5, N 4.0-5.2]), proteinuria increased to nephrotic range (90 mg/h/m2), and hematuria persisted (1707
erythrocytes/high power field). On the second day of hospitalization, a systolic heart murmur 3/6 appeared. Echocardiography showed minimal
pericardial effusion, with mild to moderate mitral regurgitation and minimal aortic regurgitation. During hospitalization, the boy became
edematous, with ascites. Chest x-ray showed pleural effusion with mild pulmonary interstitial congestion and the patient became anuric and
gained 2.7 kg despite continuous furosemide infusion (maximally 1 mg/kg/h) administered since the first day of admission. The highest BUN
value was 27 mmol/L and the highest creatinine value 240 umol/L. Metabolic acidosis was observed. Potassium, chloride, sodium, and magnesium
were within the reference ranges and phosphate was transitionally elevated (2.29 mmol/L, N 0.8-1.4). Due to hypervolemia, an acute
peritoneal catheter was inserted. Peritoneal dialysis was started on the sixth day of hospitalization and was continued for 10 days. Two
weeks after the start of the disease, skin peeling on the palms and feet was observed. Additional laboratory tests showed anemia; hemoglobin
decreased from 112 g/L to 70 g/L, as well as increased anti-streptolysin O titer (441 IU/mL, N<170), but the throat swab culture and the
blood culture remained negative. The classical (46%, N 72-128) and alternative (38 IU, N 80-120) complement pathways and C3 level were
decreased (696 mg/L, N 970-1576), while the C4 level was within the reference range. Antinuclear antigen antibodies, anti-DNA, anti-beta 2
glycoprotein antibodies, and anticardiolipin antibodies were negative. No genetic tests were performed. Ultrasonography showed enlarged and
hyperechogenic kidneys. Due to nephrotic-nephritic syndrome with a clinical course of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, renal biopsy
was performed. The biopsy showed severe diffuse global endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis with moderate intensity exudation of
neutrophils and macrophages. Fifteen percent of glomeruli exhibited extracapillary crescents. Immunofluorescence showed a “starry sky”
pattern of granular mesangial and glomerular capillary wall immune deposits positive for IgA 2+, IgG 1+, C3 4+, C4 1+ and fibrin/fibrinogen
1+. C1q was negative. Electron microscopy showed irregular mesangial and subendothelial electron-dense deposits associated with a few small
subepithelial hump-shaped deposits (Figure 1). Renal biopsy findings, clinical picture, and laboratory results suggested a diagnosis of IgA-
dominant APGN. On the basis of clinical picture, biopsy examinations, laboratory work-up, and imaging analysis, we concluded that acute
kidney injury with renal failure had to be ascribed to APGN. This diagnosis was accompanied by concomitant ARF with carditis as the major
diagnostic criterion, and fever, elevated acute phase reactants, and arthralgia as the minor criteria (4). We started penicillin V treatment
(75 mg/kg/d in 3 divided doses), followed by penicillin prophylaxis (penicillin G benzathine 600 000 units as a single dose) with
intramuscular injections every four weeks. Methylprednisolone pulse therapy was started on the seventh day after hospital admission. After
three pulses (10 mg/kg), the dose was slowly tapered over the next three months. (A) Five enlarged glomeruli in IgA-dominant acute
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis showing diffuse global endocapillary hypercellularity (hematoxylin and eosin staining). (B) An enlarged
glomerulus with global closure of the capillary lumina caused by endogeneous predominantly mesangial cell proliferation and infiltrating
blood-borne monocytes and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (HE staining). (C) Numerous brown stained CD68-positive monocytes infiltrating the
enlarged hypercellular glomerular tuft (anti-CD68 monoclonal antibody, clone KP-1, immunohistochemistry using ultraView DAB detection kit,
Ventana Medical Systems, Tuscon, AZ, USA). (D-F) Immunofluorescence microscopy showing granular mesangial and glomerular capillary wall
immune deposits with a “starry-sky” pattern of IgA dominance (D), less intensive IgG (E) and prominent C3 (F). (G) Part of a glomerular
lobule showing a pronounced endocapillary hypercellularity caused by proliferating (note one mitotic figure) predominant mesangial cells,
surrounded by a mesangial matrix with discrete dense deposits, as well as by infiltrating leukocytes (electron micrograph). (H) Discrete
electron dense subendothelial and subepithelial deposits detected using high magnification (electron micrograph). (I) A solitary hump-shaped
electron dense deposit on the outer aspect of the glomerular basement membrane (electron micrograph). Follow up and outcome. At the follow-
up visit after two months, the patient’s general condition and renal function were improved, anemia subsided, and the acute phase reactants,
anti-streptolysin O titer, and complement levels returned to reference ranges, and microhematuria persisted. Heart and kidney
ultrasonography were normal. At the follow-up visit after four years, there were no renal or cardiac sequels (Table 1). Timeline A rapidly
progressive course of glomerulonephritis with acute renal failure rarely occurs in small children. Its most frequently reported rare causes
are APGN, Henoch-Schönlein purpura nephritis, IgA nephropathy, and lupus nephritis (5). Given the clinical picture and laboratory tests, the
three latter causes were less likely to have been the causes in our case. Therefore, the most likely cause of renal disease was APGN, and
such assumption was also supported by the occurrence of acute tonsilopharingitis three weeks before renal disease, hypocomplementemia with
low C3 level, increased anti-streptolysin O titer, and negative tests for systemic lupus erythematosus. Renal biopsy confirmed the diagnosis
of atypical IgA APGN, accompanied by ARF confirmed by major and minor diagnostic criteria (4). The coexistence of APGN and ARF rarely
occurs, but it has been previously described (1-3,6,7). The explanation for the co-occurrence might be that certain strains have
nephritogenic and rheumatogenic potential, which can result in the occurrence of both sequels (6,8). The pathogenesis of ARF is well known.
The disease is caused by the mechanism of molecular mimicry. Some streptococcal antigens, such as M protein and hyaluronate capsule, have
identical antigen epitopes as human tissue proteins in the myocardium, brain, and joints. In this way they cause inflammation by inducing
cross reacting autoantibodies against human tissue proteins stimulated by cell mediated immunity in genetically predisposed patients (9). M
protein can also stimulate an autoimmune response of a host by playing the role of superantigen. The immunopathogenesis of APGN is not yet
completely understood and the most extensively studied mechanisms are circulating immune complex deposition, in situ immune complex
formation, and molecular mimicry between streptococcal and human glomerular proteins, with consequent autoimmune response (10). There are
probably different pathways leading to glomerular injury (10). It seems that the process is initiated by the glomerular plasmin-binding
activity of streptococcal glyceraldehid-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, inducing inflammatory reaction and glomerular basement membrane injury.
This enables in situ formation of immune complexes, as well as deposition of circulating immune complexes, containing cationic streptococcal
antigens, such as streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin B, which was found to co-localize with complement and IgG in glomerular subepithelial
deposits. Complement activation by alternative, classical, and lectin pathways seems also to be an important feature of APGN. Anti-IgG
antibodies that bind to IgG Fc receptors in the streptococcal wall, have been found in APGN but do not seem to play an important role in its
pathogenesis (10). Although both APGN and ARF are associated with streptococcal infection, they have different pathogenesis so it is not
surprising that they co-occur so rarely. APGN is a classic form of acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis, characterized by nephritic
syndrome occurring mostly after pharyngeal acute infection, hypocomplementemia, and diffuse endoproliferative and exudative
glomerulonephritis associated with C3-dominant immunofluorescence and hump-shaped subepithelial electron-dense deposits (11). Over recent
decades, the spectrum of the disease has changed (12). A number of reports have presented cases of atypical acute postinfectious
glomerulonephritis, particularly following staphylococcal infection, shown by immunofluorescence IgA-dominant glomerular staining,
endocapillary proliferative pattern, diffuse mesangioproliferative or even focal proliferative histomorphological patterns, and occasionally
the absence of hump-shaped deposits (13,14). In our case, biopsy demonstrated a classic histomorphology typical of APGN. However, an unusual
finding was that the predominant immunoglobulin in the overall immunoglobulin profile was IgA, similar to an observation from a previous
study (15). The treatment of ARF includes antibiotic therapy, regardless of whether pharyngitis is present at the time of the diagnosis
(16). Our patient was also treated with penicillin. Due to the rapidly progressive clinical course of IgA-dominant APGN with concomitant
nephrotic syndrome, we decided to treat the child aggressively with methylprednisolone pulses. Patients with APGN complicated by nephrotic
syndrome have poor prognosis, with a higher possibility of chronic renal disease (17). Also, ARF can be treated by glucocorticoid therapy
(18). We decided against using aspirin due to its potential undesirable side effects on kidney function (19), which was already seriously
deteriorated. After treatment with corticosteroids, renal function improved, nephritis syndrome and carditis subsided, and the child
completely recovered after 2 months, with the exception of microhematuria. In conclusion, this is the first case of IgA-dominant APGN
manifesting as acute kidney injury due to rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis occurring in a small child at the same time as ARF.
Aggressive treatment with pulses of methylprednisolone proved to be successful and we recommend its use in this type of cases. Ethical
approval Written informed consent obtained from the patient’s parents. Funding None. Declaration of authorship RR, pediatric nephrologist,
treated the patient, contributed to study conception and design. NT, pediatric rheumatologist, contributed to patient treatment and drafting
of the manuscript. DF, AV, and JM, pathologists, revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual content. Competing interests
All authors have completed the Unified Competing Interest form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available on request from the
corresponding author) and declare: no support from any organization for the submitted work; no financial relationships with any
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous 3 years; no other relationships or activities that could
appear to have influenced the submitted work.
