Orofacial cleft (OFC) is one of the most common congenital malformations with a global incidence of approximately 1/700 live births.
Clinically, OFCs can be syndromic or non-syndromic. A 5 years old boy admitted for genetic evaluation because of psychomotor delay, failure
to thrive, dysmorphic features and cleft palate. Conventional cytogenetic showed a notably short p arm of one chromosome 20. FISH analysis
identified the derivative chromosome 20 as a de novo 20p12.3 deletion. We present in this paper a Moroccan patient with syndromic cleft
palate caused by a de novo 20p12.3 deletion, and we highlight the interest of FISH in the diagnosis confirmation of chromosomal
rearrangement. In practice, 20p12.3 deletion should be considered as an etiological diagnosis in the case of syndromic cleft palate.
Orofacial clefts (OFCs), especially lip and/or palate (CL/P cleft), belong to the most prevalent birth defects . Lip and palate development
occurs very early in embryogenesis, with the lip forming first followed by the palate . Physiologically, all human embryos have CL and CP
that must fuse, however developmental failures at any stage can break necessary fusions and result in OFCs . CL and CP are complex
multifactorial disorders, where genetic and/or environmental factors can be involved . Partial autosomal deletions and duplications occur in
approximately 1/7000 live birth . Here we describe a further case of a de novo 20p12.3 microdeletion admitted for failure to thrive,
psychomotor delay, dysmorphic features and cleft palate. Conventional karyotype displayed a derivative 20 chromosome with an abnormally
short p arm. FISH analysis found a de novo 20p12.3 deletion. We report a rare etiology of syndromic cleft palate and we highlight the
importance of molecular cytogenetics in diagnosis. The proband was referred for chromosome analysis when he was 5 years old because of
psychomotor delay and unusual facies. He was the latest child of unrelated, healthy parents. The father was 38 and the mother 28 at the time
of his birth. He was born after an uncomplicated 39 weeks pregnancy, and normal vaginal delivery. As a newborn the patient had a short
period of cyanosis, and showed congenital hypotonia. Weight was 2100 g (<3rd centile), length 45 cm (<3rd centile), head circumference 34 cm
(30th centile). In subsequent evaluation, he showed a failure to thrive and slight delay in the acquisitions of motor milestones; the
patient was able to sit with 12 months, and could walk of 2 years, first words were spoken at 36 months, nevertheless, he still retains
language disorders and early intervention speech-language therapy was initiated. Length, weight and head circumference at 5 years were 99 cm
(<3rd centile), 16 kg (15th), and 50 cm (40th centile), respectively. He had submucous CP with bifid uvula, small forehead, hypertelorism
and downslanting palpebral fissures. The nasal bridge was broad and the nasal tip was bulbous. He had low set ears, short philtrum, down
turned corners of the mouth and micrognathia. The remaining physical examination was notable for widespread tooth decay and dental
overlapping. There were no significant limb anomalies, or cardiovascular disorders. CT scan of the brain was normal, electroencephalogram
showed no paroxysmal abnormalities. Ophthalmologic examination and thyroid functions were normal. X-ray examination showed that his bone age
was 2 years. Family history revealed an older brother with bilateral cleft lip, but further details were not available. Cytogenetic analysis
was carried out on the patient and his parents. The study included peripheral lymphocyte culture by a standard method using a reverse
banding technique (RHG banding), and G-banding technique using trypsin. About 0.4–0.8 mL of peripheral blood was incubated in complete
lymphocyte culture medium for 72 h. Metaphases were harvested by adding karyomax colcemid solution for 50 min followed by hypotonic KCl
(0.075 M) treatment for 20 min and fixation using standard 3:1 methanol and acetic acid fixative . At least 11 metaphases were scored. A
high-resolution analysis was done by synchronization using thymidine solution (15 mg/mL) for 16 h before harvesting . Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) was performed on patient’s metaphases obtained from whole blood cultures. Subsequent probes were applied on lymphocyte
metaphase spreads prepared from the propositus: centromere 20 specific probe (D20Z1 in 20q11.1, Abbott/Vysis, Wiesbaden, Germany), whole
chromosome paint for chromosome 20 (homemade WCP), bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones; RP11-96L6 in 20p11.21, and RP11-116E13 in
20p12.3 . RHG-banding and high resolution analysis showed a notably short p arm of one chromosome 20 (Fig. 1). FISH analysis identified a
20p12.3 deletion (Fig. 2b, c). With a much smaller D20Z1 positive region than usually observed (Fig. 2a). Since parental karyotypes were
both normal, the final karyotype was designated as follows: 46, XY, del(20)(p12.3p12.3), 20cen-dn (de novo). Cytogenetic analysis in elder
brother was not available.Fig. 1RHG (a), GTG banded (b) and high resolution partial karyogram (c) show a shortened p-arm in chromosome
20Fig. 2 a FISH result after application of WCP 20 and CEP 20 with revealing a 20 cen- on der(20). b BAC RP-96L6 excluded a deletion in
20p11.21. c BAC clone RP11-116E13 confirmed the presence of a deletion in 20p12.3 RHG (a), GTG banded (b) and high resolution partial
karyogram (c) show a shortened p-arm in chromosome 20 a FISH result after application of WCP 20 and CEP 20 with revealing a 20 cen- on
der(20). b BAC RP-96L6 excluded a deletion in 20p11.21. c BAC clone RP11-116E13 confirmed the presence of a deletion in 20p12.3 Interstitial
deletions of the short arm of chromosome 20 are reported in less than 60 cases . To the best of our knowledge only three reports described
20p12.3 deletions like the presently reported patient. Table 1 shows clinical finding of patients reported in the literature with 20p12.3
deletions. Our proband displayed some typical features, most notably failure to thrive, characteristic facial appearance (hypertelorism,
downslanting palpebral fissures, broad nasal bridge, bulbous nose, microstomia, and micrognathia); but he lacked digital anomalies and heart
defects. Only our patient had widespread tooth decay and dental overlapping that is an uncommon finding and never reported. Cleft palate was
inconstant in patients reported above . Ventricular preexcitation and cognitive delay has been reported once .Table 1Clinical features in
patients with 20p12.3 deletionFirst author of referenceDeletionCongenital abnormalitiesOur patientDe novo 20p12.3 deletionFailure to thrive,
psychomotor delaySmall forehead, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, low set ears, broad nasal bridge, bulbous nose, short
philtrum, down turned corners of the mouth, microstomia, micrognathia, widespread tooth decay, dental overlappingCleft palate, bifid
uvulaLalani et al. Patient 1De novo 20p12.3 deletion Failure to thrive, Neurocognitive delay Downslanting palpebral fissures, bilateral
epicanthal folds, broad nasal root and bridge, malar hypoplasia, full cheeks, microstomia, Persistent fetal padsWolff parkinson white
syndromePatient 2Maternal 20p12.3 deletion Short stature, Macrocephaly, Neurocognitive delay, motor delay Frontal upsweep, downslanting
palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, hypertelorism, small ears with thickened helices, long philtrum, microstomia,Broad thumbs/toes with
persistent fetal padsWolff parkinson white syndromePatient 3De novo 20p12.3 deletionMacrocephaly, Neurocognitive delay, motor delay
Hypertelorism, malar hypoplasia, persistent fetal padsSahoo et al. Patient 1Maternal 20p12.3 deletion Failure to thrive, microcephaly
micrognathia, Pierre Robin sequence, large communicating fontanelles, long philtrum, pectus excavatum, diastasis recti, gap between halluces
and second toes, vertical creases, deep palmar flexion creases, short 5th fingers Cleft palate Patent foramen ovalePatient 2? Failure to
thrive, microcephaly, language deficits Large eyes, synophrys, long philtrum, upturned nose, microstomia Deafness, cholesteatoma Cleft
palate, high-arched hard palate, bifid uvula Zygodactylous triradius between the 2nd and 3rd rightoesPatient 3De novo 20p12.3 deletion
Failure to thrive, motor deficits with a head lag and wobble, delayed/poor reflexes, central hypotonia and feeding difficultiesFlat facial
profile, prominent forehead, downslanting palpebral fissures, depressed nasal bridge, small, upturned nose with anteverted nares, pinpoint
hemangioma on the tip of the nose, long philtrum, micrognathia, transverse crease across the chinDecreased muscle mass, subtle
hyperextensibility of hands and feet, recurrent hip dislocations and developmental dysplasia of the hipsU-shaped cleft palate Williams et
al. Paternal 20p12.3 deletion Failure to thrive, microcephaly, psychomotor delay, microretrognathia, widened palpebral fissures, long
philtrum, digital hypoplasia of second and third toes, self-stimulatory behaviors, mild dextroscoliosis, central incisors, bifid uvula,
cleft palate Words in italics represents features in common with our patient Clinical features in patients with 20p12.3 deletion Words in
italics represents features in common with our patient In the present case, FISH analysis allowed us to identify 20 chromosome derivative as
a de novo 20p12.3 deletion. This variant was the most predominant one, reported previously in three other patients [8, 9]. However,
inherited forms were also described, often maternal [8, 9], and scarcely paternal . Based to the NCBI map viewer
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/mapview/), 11 annotated genes within 20p12.3 region were found, notably BMP2 gene. This gene is well
known to play a critical role in bone formation, as well as being implicated in a wide range of functions in morphogenesis, including palate
morphogenesis. Moreover, the widespread expression of BMP2 in cells of skeletal, neurological, cardiac, and other tissues supports the
pleiotropic effects of BMP2 haploinsufficiency. This gene is also expressed in post natal odontoblast and ameloblast during tooth
differentiation. Interestingly, its deletion in early odontoblast results in a permanent tooth phenotype ; this may explain dental
abnormalities in our patient, but further cases with similar microdeletion and mutational analysis of BMP2 are required to delineate this
genotype–phenotype correlation. We describe here a Moroccan patient with psychomotor delay and facial dysmorphism, in which a de novo
20p12.3 deletion was identified, and we highlight the interest of FISH in the diagnostic confirmation of chromosomal rearrangement. In
practice, 20p12.3 deletion can be considered as an etiological diagnosis of syndromic cleft palate. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient’s parents for publication without image of this case report. orofacial cleft cleft lip cleft palate fluorescent in situ
hybridization Saadia Amasdl and Abdelhafid Natiq contributed equally to this work SA carried out the cytogenetic study and drafted the
manuscript. AN participated in the design of the study and in the draft of the manuscript. AS participated in the cytogenetic study and
revised the manuscript. MZ provided clinical data. JL helped in analysis. TL carried out the molecular cytogenetic study and revising the
work critically for important intellectual content. SA participated in the draft of the manuscript. AS participated in the design of the
study and in the draft of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to gratefully
acknowledge the patient and his parents for their collaboration. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
