Cervical lymph node metastasis is common in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), but occipital lymph node metastasis in NPC
patients has not yet been reported. In this case report, we describe an NPC patient with occipital lymph node metastasis. The clinical
presentation, diagnostic procedure, treatment, and outcome of this case were presented, with a review of the related literature. In South
China, nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a common head and neck cancer, with an incidence of 15–50 per 100,000 people [1, 2]. It is often
called “Canton Tumor” because of the highest morbidity of NPC in Guangdong Province, China. More than 70% of NPC patients have already
developed cervical lymph node metastasis at initial diagnosis [3, 4]. Based on the American Joint Committee on Cancer classification , the
definition of the cervical levels is shown in Table 1. Cervical levels of NPC, from high to low incidence, are level II, level III, level V,
level IV, supraclavicular region, level I, and level VI . However, to our knowledge, metastasis to the occipital lymph node in NPC has not
been reported. In this case report, we describe one NPC patient with occipital lymph node metastasis and discuss the treatment regimen. We
also review related literature.Table 1Anatomical structures defining the boundaries of the cervical levels and sublevelsBoundary
levelSuperiorInferiorAnterior (medial)Posterior (lateral)IASymphysis of mandibleBody of hyoidAnterior belly of contralateral digastric
muscleAnterior belly of ipsilateral digastric muscleIBBody of mandiblePosterior belly of diagastric muscleAnterior belly of digastric
muscleStylohyoid muscleIIASkull baseHorizontal plane defined by the inferior border of the hyoid boneThe stylohyoid muscleVertical plane
defined by the spinal accessory nerveIIBSkull baseHorizontal plane defined by the inferior body of the hyoid boneVertical plane defined by
the spinal accessory nerveLateral border of the sternocleidomastoid muscleIIIHorizontal plane defined by the inferior body of
hyoidHorizontal plane defined by the inferior border of the cricoid cartilageLateral border of the sternohyoid muscleLateral border of the
sternocleidomastoid or sensory branches of cervical plexusIVHorizontal plane defined by the inferior border of the cricoid
cartilageClavicleLateral border of the sternohyoid muscleLateral border of the sternocleidomastoid or sensory branches of cervical
plexusVAApex of the convergence of the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius musclesHorizontal plane defined by the lower border of the cricoid
cartilagePosterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle or sensory branches of cervical plexusAnterior border of the trapezius
muscleVBHorizontal plane defined by the lower border of the cricoids cartilageClaviclePosterior border of the sternocleidomastoid
muscleAnterior border of the trapezius muscleVIHyoid boneSuprasternal notchCommon carotid arteryCommon carotid arteryVIISuprasternal
notchInnominate arterySternumTrachea, esophagus, and prevertebral fascia Anatomical structures defining the boundaries of the cervical
levels and sublevels A 19-year-old man from Jiangxi Province, China, was admitted with the chief complaint of bilateral cervical masses for
3 months. The patient did not complain any of the following symptoms: fever, nose bleeding, obstruction, tinnitus, diplopia, or headache. He
had no history of trauma, surgery, smoking, or drinking. Physical examination showed a neoplasm in the nasopharynx and several enlarged
cervical lymph nodes of bilateral levels II–V; the largest one was 10 cm × 8 cm. In addition, an occipital lymph node of 2 cm × 2 cm was
palpable, with medium firmness and clear edge. The laboratory results were normal except for the results of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). EBV
levels were abnormally elevated: EBV viral capsid antigen (VCA)-IgA, 1:640; EBV early antigen (EA)-IgA, 1:40; and EBV-DNA, 8.82 × 105
copies/mL. Biopsy of the nasopharyngeal neoplasm confirmed undifferentiated non-keratinizing carcinoma. Because of the possibility, though
rare, of NPC-caused metastasis in the occipital region, a fine-needle aspiration of the occipital lymph node was also performed. The
pathologic report after hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) staining identified poorly differentiated carcinoma, which suggested metastasis from
NPC (Fig. 1a). Immunohistochemical analysis and in situ hybridization of the occipital lymph node further confirmed the presence of EBV-
encoded RNAs (EBERs), indicating EBERs expression in tumor cells (Fig. 1b).Fig. 1Representative images of pathologic slices from fine-needle
aspiration of the occipital lymph node (original magnification, ×40). a Hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stained section shows diffused tumor
cells displaying characteristics of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cells. b Immunohistochemical analysis and in situ hybridization of the
occipital lymph node shows the expression of Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNAs (EBERs) in tumor cells Representative images of pathologic
slices from fine-needle aspiration of the occipital lymph node (original magnification, ×40). a Hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stained
section shows diffused tumor cells displaying characteristics of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cells. b Immunohistochemical analysis and in
situ hybridization of the occipital lymph node shows the expression of Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNAs (EBERs) in tumor cells Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) of the nasopharynx and neck revealed that the tumor extended into the right parapharyngeal space, right carotid
sheath, right medical pterygoid muscle, right pterygopalatine fossa, right cavernous sinus, and vast area of the skull base. Bilaterally
enlarged retropharyngeal lymph nodes and cervical lymph nodes at level IIa, IIb, III, IV, Va, and Vb were also detected. An occipital lymph
node of 18 mm × 19 mm was detected by MRI (Fig. 2). Other radiographic studies, including chest radiography, abdominal sonography, and a
bone scan, showed no distant metastasis. Accordingly, the patient was diagnosed comprehensively as having T4N3M0 stage IVb undifferentiated
non-keratinizing NPC.Fig. 2Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the NPC patient before treatment. T1-weighted axial MR images a without
contrast, b with contrast, and c T2-weighted axial MR image show an occipital lymph node (18 mm × 19 mm) with equal T1 signal, long or equal
T2 signal, and obvious enhancement (arrows). T1-weighted sagittal MR image d without contrast and e with contrast also show an enlarged
lymph node with enhancement in subcutaneous tissue of the occiput (arrows) Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the NPC patient before
treatment. T1-weighted axial MR images a without contrast, b with contrast, and c T2-weighted axial MR image show an occipital lymph node
(18 mm × 19 mm) with equal T1 signal, long or equal T2 signal, and obvious enhancement (arrows). T1-weighted sagittal MR image d without
contrast and e with contrast also show an enlarged lymph node with enhancement in subcutaneous tissue of the occiput (arrows) The patient
received two cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin (80 mg/m2, day 1) and 5-fluorouracil (4000 mg/m2, days 1–5), repeated every
21 days. The patient also received two cycles of concurrent cisplatin (80 mg/m2, day 1), repeated every 21 days. Then, intensity-modulated
radiation therapy (IMRT) was administered: a total dose of 70 Gy to the gross tumor volume (GTV), 66 Gy to involved cervical lymph nodes,
64 Gy to the prophylactic radiation area of the primary lesion, and 58 Gy to bilateral cervical fields (all levels). An extra target volume
(a total dose of 70 Gy) was given to the occipital lymph node, and an extra prophylactic dose of 58 Gy was given to the 5- to 10-mm
surrounding area. All doses were given in 32 fractions, 5 days per week. The whole course of treatment was completed with no disruptions.
Follow-up after completion of radiotherapy showed that the primary lesion and lesions in the cervical lymph nodes and the occipital lymph
node could still be detected by MRI; however, they were much smaller than the sizes before treatment. At 1-month follow-up, the primary
lesion and lesions in cervical lymph nodes and the occipital lymph node had shrunk further. At 3-month follow-up, no primary lesion or
lesions in lymph nodes were detected (Fig. 3). However, 6 months after treatment, the patient returned with a mass of 40 mm × 45 mm in the
middle of the sternum. Later, ultrasound-guided biopsy histologically confirmed undifferentiated carcinoma. Further examination of whole-
body positron emission tomography/computed tomography revealed multiple fluorodeoxyglucose uptake, with foci in the sternum, left ilium,
bilateral internal mammary lymph nodes, and spleen, all of which were considered metastases for the high standard uptake value. The
nasopharynx and related regions remained well controlled without sign of recurrence. Other abnormal indexes were EBV VCA-IgA titer of 1:320,
EBV EA-IgA titer of 1:20, and EBV-DNA load of 5.51 × 103 copies/mL. Thus, the latest diagnosis of this patient was multiple distant
metastases after chemoradiotherapy for NPC. Palliative chemotherapy was needed immediately in this situation, but the patient and his
parents refused further treatment and left. Long-term follow-up is being continued.Fig. 3MR imaging of the NPC patient at 3 months after
treatment. T1-weighted axial MR image of the nasopharynx a without contrast, b with contrast, and c T2-weighted axial MR image of the
nasopharynx show edema signal of the nasopharyngeal mucosa but no mass. T1-weighted axial MR image d with contrast of previous occipital
lymph node level and e T2-weighted axial MR image of previous occipital lymph node level show normal structure now. T1-weighted sagittal MR
images f without contrast and g with contrast reveal no mass as well MR imaging of the NPC patient at 3 months after treatment. T1-weighted
axial MR image of the nasopharynx a without contrast, b with contrast, and c T2-weighted axial MR image of the nasopharynx show edema signal
of the nasopharyngeal mucosa but no mass. T1-weighted axial MR image d with contrast of previous occipital lymph node level and e
T2-weighted axial MR image of previous occipital lymph node level show normal structure now. T1-weighted sagittal MR images f without
contrast and g with contrast reveal no mass as well NPC is an aggressive disease that metastasizes to lymph nodes, mostly the cervical lymph
nodes. In an analysis of 924 NPC patients, Mao et al. sought to determine the pattern of cervical lymphatic metastases. In these patients,
sentinel metastases were found in the retropharyngeal space and level II, followed by level III, level V, level IV, and supraclavicular
area. Another similar study of 779 patients by Chen et al. showed the rates of cervical lymphatic metastases in different levels: the
highest was 76.6% in the retropharyngeal space, followed by 64.1% in level IIb, 49.3% in level IIa, 23.6% in level III, 8.6% in level Va,
4.2% in level IV, 2.7% in level Vb, and 0.13% in level I. However, studies of NPC lymphatic metastasis did not reveal a lymphatic drainage
pathway to the occipital region. One possible approach for occipital lymph node metastasis from NPC, based on topographic anatomy , was
presumed as the nasopharynx → jugulodigastric lymph nodes → superior deep lateral cervical lymph nodes → deep lateral cervical lymph
nodes → occipital lymph node (backflow). In the present case report, the patient had T4N3M0 NPC with lymphatic metastasis in almost all
levels; therefore, the occipital region could presumably be involved from lymph backflow of communicating lymphatic drainage branches. A
remarkable feature of this case was the notably large bilateral cervical lymph nodes, which may have contributed to the occipital lymph node
metastasis described above. The tumor of this patient was staged as N3 category; the definition of the tumor in N3 category is “metastasis
in a lymph node(s) >6 cm and/or to supraclavicular fossa, the last stage of N category, suggesting the worst prognosis among patients with
lymphatic metastasis and a very high risk of distant metastasis.” In this case, we suggested that not only the lymph node size or
supraclavicular fossa metastasis but also uncommon regions such as the occipital lymph node was associated with a high risk of distant
metastasis. On the other hand, MRI scans of lymph nodes in the neck and occipitalia showed similarities, including approximate T1- and
T2-weighted signals, the same liquefactive necrosis signs, and semblable lymphatic fusion. These imaging characteristics suggested that the
occipital lymph node is very large and identical to the cervical metastatic lymph nodes. Pathologic confirmation indicated that the origin
of the occipital lymph node metastasis was EBER-positive. It is well known that EBV plays an important role in tumorigenesis and development
of NPC and has been shown to be a biomarker of NPC . Considering these results, we postulate that extensive cervical lymphatic metastasis,
especially those meeting the criteria of N3 category, could sporadically cause lymphadenectasis in unusual sites, which we hypothesized as
the medium transition between local metastasis and distant metastasis. Lymphadenectasis in unusual sites likely tremendously increases the
risk of systemic metastasis. Therefore, for patients who have N3 category tumors, physicians should be aware of unconventional lymphatic
metastases, such as metastasis to the occipital lymph node. Once an unusual indication is detected, more extensive analyses should be
performed until a final diagnosis is reached. Metastasis to the occipital lymph node is uncommon. It occasionally occurs in cases of skin
cancer or malignancies of the cutaneous appendages of the head and neck, scalp lipoma or liposarcoma, scalp inflammation, lymphoma,
malignancies of the external auditory canal, and melanoma of the head and neck. Other rare cases of occipital lymph node metastasis have
been seen in sweat gland tumor [13, 14], lung cancer [15, 16], and thyroid cancer [17, 18]. Various treatment strategies for occipital lymph
node metastases from cancers other than NPC are shown in Table 2. In a thyroid papillary carcinoma case, reported by Lin et al. in 1997, the
primary thyroid papillary carcinoma and the occipital metastatic mass were resected. Without further chemotherapy or radiotherapy, the
patient died 17 months later due to seizures caused by metastasis to the brain . The case showed that, although surgery could remove the
occipital metastasis, distant metastasis would be a fatal failure. A case reported by Sheth et al. from Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center demonstrated another potentially effective multidisciplinary therapy for occipital metastasis. In this case of mucinous eccrine
carcinoma, excision was performed and radiation was administered sequentially to the occipital area and lymph nodes, resulting in 4 years of
disease-free survival. Later, two craniotomies and two courses of radiation to the brain and centrums helped the patient live an additional
4 years, after which the disease recurred . This long-term survival was encouraging, reminding us that a promising outcome can be achieved
in rare cases of occipital metastasis from different malignancies. The comprehensive method used in common metastases, and multidisciplinary
management including surgery and radiotherapy might be effective.Table 2Occipital lymph node metastases from different
diseasesAuthors/yearSex/agePrimary diseaseHistologyTreatmentResultTian et al. /19925 patients:AbsentSquamous cell carcinomaResectionThree
survived (median follow-up, 68 months)M/30Y,SurvivedF/40Y,DiedM/45Y,DiedF/37Y,SurvivedM/52YSurvivedTian et al. /1992M/22YSweat gland
tumorSyringocarcinomaResectionDiedTian et al. /1992M/26YAbsentMelanomaResectionSurvived (follow-up, 115 months)He et al. /1996F/53YLung
cancerSquamous cell carcinomaTreatment refusalAbsentLin et al. /1997F/75YThyroid cancerThyroid papillary microcarcinomaResectionDied after
17 months of treatmentSheth et al. /2010F/45YSweat gland tumorMucinous eccrine carcinomaChemotherapy + radiotherapyDied 8 years after the
first treatmentKamper et al. /2011F/69YLung cancerBronchial carcinomaChemotherapy + radiotherapyAbsentKarabeir et al. /2011F/82YThyroid
cancerThyroid follicular carcinomaAbsentAbsent F female; M male; Y years Occipital lymph node metastases from different diseases F female; M
male; Y years It is well known that radiotherapy is the principal treatment of NPC. Currently, IMRT is widely used because it can maximize
the radiation dose to the target and minimize exposure to surrounding critical structures , simultaneously increasing the locoregional
control rate and decreasing serious adverse effects . In our case, IMRT was administered to the primary lesion, the cervical lymph nodes,
and the pathologically confirmed occipital lymph node. The same 70-Gy dose was administered to both the nasopharyngeal neoplasm and the
occipital lymph node and resulted in a good local regional control so far, indicating that a standard IMRT dose could achieve satisfying
local control; however, in this special case of unconventional lymphatic metastasis of NPC, radiation therapy alone was not enough to
prevent distant metastasis. Recently, it was reported that simultaneous integrated boost-intensity modulated radiotherapy (SIB-IMRT) for
patients with pediatric and adolescent NPC was an optional treatment. In the study by Tao et al. , 34 patients (age 8–20 years) received
SIB-IMRT combined with chemotherapy; the results showed that this combination treatment could achieve excellent long-term locoregional
control with mild incidence of late toxicities. In these cases, distant metastasis was the primary cause of failure , which was consistent
with the result of the present case study. On the other hand, as a systemic cure, chemotherapy combined with radiotherapy plays an important
role in the treatment of locally advanced NPC. In the case presented here, neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by concurrent chemoradiotherapy
was disappointing in terms of systemic control, since multiple distant metastases occurred in a short time (6 months). Perhaps more
aggressive chemotherapy, such as adjuvant chemotherapy, should be given in cases of uncommon lymphadenectasis like occipital lymph node
metastasis. Besides radiotherapy and chemotherapy, targeted therapy could be another option. In 2005, Chan et al. launched a multicenter
phase II study to investigate whether cetuximab in combination with chemotherapy could benefit NPC patients with recurrence or metastasis.
The results were promising: the disease control rate of cetuximab in combination with chemotherapy was 60%, and adverse effects were
acceptable. Although occipital lymph node metastasis is rare in NPC, it may present in patients with extensive cervical lymph node
involvement. Aggressive treatment with combined IMRT and chemotherapy might be beneficial in these cases. In radiotherapy such as IMRT, the
occipital lymph node could be treated as another GTV with radical radiation dose. Distant metastasis remains the primary cause of treatment
failure. The proper treatment intensity of chemotherapy is unclear in this context; however, multidisciplinary medical management seems
necessary. This special case is still open for discussion and comprehensive study. American Joint Committee on Cancer early antigen Epstein-
Barr virus encoded RNA Epstein-Barr virus gross tumor volume fluorodeoxyglucose hematoxylin and eosin intensity-modulated radiation therapy
magnetic resonance imaging positron emission tomography/computed tomography nasopharyngeal carcinoma standard uptake value viral capsid
antigen Jing Yang and Wei-Xiong Xia contributed equally to this work JY collected the data and drafted the manuscript. YQX designed the
study and helped revise the manuscript. GX conceived the study and participated in its coordination. XL, WXX, LRK, and YHY participated in
the data interpretation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
