Terbinafine is an allylamine antifungal agent which is widely used for the treatment of fungal infections. Cutaneous side effects have been
reported in 2% of the patients on terbinafine therapy with many morphological patterns. We report a case of terbinafine induced pityriasis
rosea, a very rare side effect of terbinafine. This report emphasizes the importance of counseling the patient to report immediately in the
event of a cutaneous eruption. Terbinafine is an allylamine, a lipophilic compound, used for the treatment of onychomycosis and other fungal
infections. Adverse effects are reported in 10% and cutaneous reactions in 2% of patients on terbinafine therapy. These include pruritus,
rash, urticaria, erythema multiforme, cutaneous lupus, and psoriasis. Terbinafine induced pityriasis rosea-like eruption is not common. A
25-year-old male with mycologically confirmed fingernail onychomycosis, who was prescribed oral terbinafine 250 mg daily for 18 days,
presented with an itchy rash on the body for 4 days. The rash started on the chest and then progressed to involve the rest of the body
within 4 days [Figure 1]. There was no history of fever or preceding upper respiratory illness. He was not on any other medication
simultaneously and never had a similar rash in the past. There was no history of previous drug allergy. He had taken terbinafine for 1 month
for the same indication, which he discontinued 2 weeks before restarting the present course of this antifungal. There was no family history
of similar illness. Erythematous plaques with elevated borders and collarettes of fine scaling on the back. Most of the lesions have their
long axis parallel to the lines of cleavage giving a “Christmas tree” distribution General physical examination was noncontributory.
Cutaneous examination revealed scattered erythematous papules and plaques on the trunk, upper limbs, and gluteal region. Few plaques were
noted to have peripheral collarettes of scaling. Erythematous tumid plaques were noted on the cheeks. There was a single erythematous papule
on the penile shaft. Scalp and oral mucosa were normal. Few fingernails were dystrophic. He was clinically diagnosed to have terbinafine
induced pityriasis rosea-like eruption and admitted in the dermatology ward. Investigations revealed a total leukocyte count of 5.2 × 109/L
with a differential of 67% neutrophils, 30% lymphocytes, and 2% eosinophils. Liver and renal function tests were within normal limits. The
Venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) test was carried out to rule out secondary syphilis, which was negative. However, a skin biopsy
was not performed. The offending drug, terbinafine, was withdrawn. The patient was given supportive management in the form of antihistamines
and topical steroids. The rash began to resolve quickly, and the patient was discharged from the hospital after 4 days. The common cutaneous
adverse effects associated with terbinafine therapy are urticaria, rash, and pruritus, usually occurring within a month of therapy. The
other less common adverse effects are erythema multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens–Johnson syndrome, erythema annulare-like
eruption, fixed drug eruption, alopecia areata, flare up of dermatitis, induction and exacerbation of psoriasis, and subacute cutaneous
lupus-like eruption. Pityriasis rosea is a rare adverse effect of terbinafine therapy. Pityriasis rosea is an inflammatory skin disease
characterized by erythematous papulosquamous eruptions localized mainly to the trunk. Viral agents, especially human herpes virus 6 and 7,
autoimmunity, drugs such as captopril, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, barbiturates, metronidazole, isotretinoin, griseofulvin,
terbinafine, and psychogenic factors have been proposed as possible etiological factors. The initial lesion is larger than subsequent
lesions and is called the herald patch. This herald patch is usually absent in drug induced pityriasis rosea; in our patient too, this
feature was conspicuously absent. Itching was a prominent feature in our patient which is consistent with a drug reaction. Gupta et al. have
reported pityriasis rosea as an itchy rash beginning on the trunk after 4 weeks of regular treatment with terbinafine. The patient developed
lesions after 18 days of regular treatment; however, he had been previously sensitized during the prior treatment with the drug. Secondary
syphilis can a have similar cutaneous presentation but is usually asymptomatic. The patient denied a history of unprotected sexual
intercourse and VDRL was negative. Pityriasiform variant of seborrhoeic dermatitis was ruled out because other seborrhoeic sites were
spared, and there were no previous episodes of such eruptions. The other supportive evidence in favor of a drug-induced reaction was the
improvement noted in the lesions on stopping the offending drug. Pityriasis rosea typically occurs in the spring season with a history of
preceding upper respiratory infection. The patient presented in winter without any prodrome. The Naranjo causality assessment score for this
case was 6, thereby suggesting probable causal association of the adverse drug reaction with terbinafine. It is recommended that all
patients who receive terbinafine therapy should be counseled about the possible adverse effects and instructed to discontinue the drug and
report to the physician if a cutaneous eruption develops. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
