Cervical cancer can infiltrate locally and directly spread to adjacent organs including the vagina, peritoneum, urinary bladder, ureters,
rectum, and paracervical tissue, but the intestine metastasis from cervical cancer is extremely rare, which can easily be misdiagnosed.
Here, we report a case about a 45-year-old postoperative cervical cancer patient with metastases to small intestine and sigmoid colon who
presented abdominal distention and dull pain due to intestinal obstruction. The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy, and two intestinal
segments including the tumors were resected. The postoperative pathological diagnosis illustrated sigmoid colon and terminal ileum
metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. This case demonstrates that intestine metastasis must be considered in the differential diagnosis of
acute abdomen in patients with cervical cancer even at an early tumor stage. Cervical cancer is a worldwide disease which ranks as the
second most common malignant disease and also the third most common cause of cancer death among women . More than 90 % of cases are
attributed to human papillomavirus (HPV) infection . Most cases occur in developing countries, as no effective screening procedures are
available . Over the past decades, the survival of patients with cervical carcinoma has significantly improved attributing to early
screening and the rapid development of concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy and radiotherapy [4, 5]. In spite of the prolonged survival,
the patients are also at an increased risk of recurrence and metastases, which are the main causes of death. The primary routes in cervical
carcinoma metastases are direct local extension and lymphatic dissemination, while hematogenous dissemination occurs infrequently, which
usually occurs with advanced tumor or uncommon pathologic types, such as adenosquamous or neuroendocrine tumors. In general, cervical cancer
can spread to adjacent organs including the vagina, peritoneum, urinary bladder, ureters, rectum, and paracervical tissue. Meanwhile, Common
distant metastatic sites include the lungs, bones, and liver , but cervical cancer metastases to the small intestine and sigmoid colon are
rare. Here, we present the first reported case of a cervical cancer patient with simultaneous metastases to the small intestine and sigmoid
colon, based on our knowledge. A 45-year-old woman was admitted to our department with a 5-day history of abdominal distention and dull
pain, especially at the upper umbilical region, and vomiting of gastric content without passage of stools or flatus. She had an erect
abdominal plain radiograph which showed intestinal obstruction in a local hospital previously. A careful medical history was taken on
admission. Three years ago, she suffered from cervical cancer and had a radical hysterectomy with adnexectomy. The postoperative
pathological diagnosis is cervical moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with its maximum diameter to 9 mm and infiltration
depth to 2 mm. No lymph node metastasis was found in the bilateral pelvic and common iliac lymph node. It was diagnosed with International
Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stage IB1 cervical cancer. After the operation, she had a 3- to 6-month follow-up but did not
have any radiotherapy or chemotherapy. On physical examination, her vital signs were stable. There were no lesions in the oropharynx and
nasopharynx. She had abdominal light distension and a loud gurgling sound. No abdominal tenderness and rebound tenderness were found. Rectal
examination and bimanual vaginal examination had no obvious abnormalities including lump and bleeding. Analysis of blood tests was
unremarkable except the elevating of squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCCA) and CA125. An erect abdominal plain radiograph was rechecked,
showing the upper left intestine expanding and fluid levels with a stepladder pattern. Abdominal contrasted computed tomography (CT) showed
intestinal obstruction with a thickened bowel wall in the terminal ileum and upper sigmoid colon (Fig. 1a, b). Abdominal magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) indicated the same result (Fig. 1c, d) and an unremarkable uterus stump (Fig. 1e). Colonoscopy showed a narrowed sigmoid colon
lumen with smooth mucosa, and the pathological results indicated mucosal chronic inflammation (Fig. 2). Chest CT and X-ray had no obvious
abnormity.Fig. 1Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. CT scan revealed lower intestinal obstruction with a thickened bowel wall in the
terminal ileum (solid yellow arrow in (a) and upper sigmoid colon (feint yellow arrow in (b). Abdominal magnetic resonance (MR) revealed a
thickened bowel wall in the terminal ileum (solid yellow arrow in (c) and upper sigmoid colon (feint yellow arrow in d). MR imaging also
showed an unremarkable uterus stump (solid yellow arrow in e)Fig. 2Colonoscopy and biopsy. Colonoscopy confirmed that the intestinal mucosa
was smooth without ulcers or lumps (a) except sigmoid colon luminal narrowing (b). Pathology result of the narrowing site biopsy showed
mucosal chronic inflammation (c) Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. CT scan revealed lower intestinal obstruction with a thickened
bowel wall in the terminal ileum (solid yellow arrow in (a) and upper sigmoid colon (feint yellow arrow in (b). Abdominal magnetic resonance
(MR) revealed a thickened bowel wall in the terminal ileum (solid yellow arrow in (c) and upper sigmoid colon (feint yellow arrow in d). MR
imaging also showed an unremarkable uterus stump (solid yellow arrow in e) Colonoscopy and biopsy. Colonoscopy confirmed that the intestinal
mucosa was smooth without ulcers or lumps (a) except sigmoid colon luminal narrowing (b). Pathology result of the narrowing site biopsy
showed mucosal chronic inflammation (c) The patient was fasted and received passive gastric decompression along with total parenteral
nutrition on admission. Abdominal distention eased on the first day. In consideration of the patient’s condition and the imaging examination
and colonoscopy results, exploratory laparotomy was performed. Widespread intestinal adhesion and two firm tumors (2*2 cm and 3*2 cm
separately) with a local thickened intestine wall at the end of the ileum and upper sigmoid colon were noted. She underwent segmental
intestine resection and had end-to-end anastomosis. The postoperative pathological diagnosis showed squamous cell carcinoma (Fig. 3). After
the operation, up until now (4 months), the patient has been treated with four cycles of a docetaxel-cisplatin combination chemotherapy
regimen (day 1, 75 mg/m2 docetaxel; days 1–3, 25 mg/m2 cisplatin, per 21 days).Fig. 3Postoperative pathological examination. Microscopic
examination of the intestinal tumor demonstrated a full-thickness wall of sigmoid colon and serosa, and the muscular layer of the terminal
ileum had metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer embolus was seen in the vessel, and the peri-intestine lymph node also had metastatic
squamous cell carcinoma. a small intestine and b sigmoid colon (staining with hematoxylin and eosin, ×100 magnification) Postoperative
pathological examination. Microscopic examination of the intestinal tumor demonstrated a full-thickness wall of sigmoid colon and serosa,
and the muscular layer of the terminal ileum had metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer embolus was seen in the vessel, and the peri-
intestine lymph node also had metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. a small intestine and b sigmoid colon (staining with hematoxylin and
eosin, ×100 magnification) In the present case, the patient underwent segmental intestine resection, and the pathological result indicated
squamous cell carcinoma. Excluding possible primary lesions like oropharynx, nasopharynx, lung, and esophagus cancer, with the
characteristics of outside-to-inside invasion from the pathology result, indicating the primary lesion in the abdominal or pelvic cavity,
cervical cancer with small intestine and sigmoid colon metastases was diagnosed. After precise calculation, the 10-year incidence of distant
metastases was 3 % for stage IA, 16 % for stage IB, 31 % for stage IIA, 26 % for stage IIB, 39 % for stage III, and 75 % for stage IVA in
cervical cancer patients . The most frequently observed metastatic sites were the lungs, bones, liver, supraclavicular nodes, and para-
aortic nodes etc. (Table 1). Unusual metastases can be seen in the skin and soft tissues , breast , pericardium , umbilical region , labia
and introitus area , thyroid gland , oral cavity , and skeletal muscle . Cervical cancer metastatic to the intestine is a rare occurrence.
Table 2 provides a comprehensive review of the published cases of intestine metastases from cervical cancer in the English literature dating
back to 1976. Things did not go the way we thought because not only do cervical cancer metastases to the intestine occur at an advanced
tumor stage, but they also occur at an early stage, even at stage IA. The case presented here is the first report of cervical cancer with
simultaneous small intestine and sigmoid colon metastases.Table 1The main metastatic sites of cervical cancermetastatic sitesa
PercentNodes8.6Supraclavicular3.0Para-
aortic3.0Inguinal2.3Mediastinal1.7Iliac1.3Cervical0.8Axillary0.5Other1.8Lung5.7Bone3.8Peritoneum0.6Liver2.2Gastrointestinal tract8.0Stomach
<2.0Ileum 1.2–3.2Spleen 1.6–30.0Ovary 1.3–6.3Heart 1.2Brain 0.4–1.2Skin and subcutaneous tissue 0.1–2.0 aModified and updated from Table
2Intestine metastases from cervical cancer as reported in the literatureNo.Author YearAgePathologic typeStage of SCCA of cervix at
diagnosisPrevious treatmentInterval timeSymptomMetastasis sitesConfirmation of diagnosisTreatmentOutcome1Bradley Watson 197647Adenosquamous
carcinomaStage IVNoneSynchronousIntermittent central abdominal pain associated with vomitingSmall intestineLaparotomySegmentary intestinal
resectionNA2Gurian, L. 198164Squamous cell carcinomaStage IIIBNoneSynchronousOccult bleedingDuodenumEndoscopyRefused surgical
interventionDeath3Mathur, S. K. 198435Squamous cell carcinomaStage IVNoneSynchronousCentral abdominal angina, persistent vomiting and
constipationTerminal ileumLaparotomyRight hemicolectomyRecovery4Christopherson, W. 198542Squamous cell carcinomaStage
IIIBNA2 yearsIntermittent nausea and vomiting, upper abdominal painIleum, transverse colonLaparotomySegmentary intestinal
resectionRecovery5Hulecki, S. J. 198548Squamous cell carcinomaStage IBNA7 yearsGross hematuria from the
conduitIleumEndoscopyLaparotomyRecovery6Misonou, J. 198869Squamous cell carcinomaStage IAHysterectomy13 yearsSudden onset of pan-
peritonitisSmall intestineNANANA7Singla, M. 201148Squamous cell carcinomaNARadiation therapy2 yearsRight hypochondrium painHepatic flexure
of colonLaparotomyRight extended hemicolectomyRecovery for 2 years8Kanthan, R. 201149Squamous cell carcinomaStage IIAChemotherapy and
radiation treatment2 yearsUpper-gastrointestinal bleedingDuodenumesophagogastroduodenoscopyNoneDied of multiple organ failure9Lee T.H.
201150Squamous cell carcinomaStage IIAHysterectomy with systemic chemotherapy2 yearsEpigastric painAmpulla of
vaterEndoscopyChemotherapyNA10Raphael, J. C. 201157Squamous cell carcinomaStage IVNoneSynchronousPersistent epigastric pain and
vomitingPyloroduodenal regionEndoscopychemotherapyNA11Sugimoto, T. 201384AdenocarcinomaStage IIIRadiation therapy3 monthsEpigastric
painIleumLaparotomyThe necrotic part of the ileum resection4 months survival12Joshi, S. R. 201350Squamous cell carcinomaStage IIWertheim’s
hysterectomy5 monthsAbdominal pain, vomiting and intermittent feverIleocaecal regionLaparotomySegmentary intestinal resectionNA13Datta, S.
201355Squamous cell carcinomaStage IIBChemoradiation3.5 yearsAbdominal pain, vomiting, constipationIleocaecal regionLaparotomyRight
hemicolectomyNA14Barlin, J. N. 201337Adenosquamous carcinomaStage IBRadical hysterectomy1.5 yearsHematocheziaSigmoid
colonColonoscopyRectosigmoid resectionRecovery15Iliescu, L. 201470Squamous cell carcinomaStage IIA1Radiation therapy followed by curative
surgery2 yearsIntermittent subocclusive symptoms, fatigue, nauseaTerminal ileumLaparotomySegmentary intestinal resectionNA16Debasish, B.
201443Squamous cell carcinomaNATotal abdominal hysterectomy8 monthsSymptoms of chronic intestinal obstructionTerminal ileumLaparotomyRight
hemicolectomyNA17Nagarekha, K. 201450Squamous cell carcinomaNAHysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy3 monthsVomiting and
abdominal painJejunumLaparotomySegmentary intestinal resectionNA18Hui Qiu 201546Squamous cell carcinomaStage
IIBChemoradiotherapy4 yearsAcute abdominal painIleocaecal regionLaparotomySegmentary intestinal resectionRecovery for 2 years NA not
available from original literature The main metastatic sites of cervical cancer aModified and updated from Intestine metastases from
cervical cancer as reported in the literature NA not available from original literature The intestine metastases usually occur through the
lymphatics to the bowel serosa and less commonly via intraperitoneal dissemination, direct spread, and hematogenous spread . As for the
present case, another explanation is surgical factor, for tumor dissemination may be caused by reckless operation. Although the possible
metastatic route is distinct, the rarity of intestine metastases is still unclear now . Sigmoid colon metastases are rarely seen and may be
because of the relatively short intestinal segment. While small intestine accounted for a large space in the enterocelia. So, the low
incidence rates of small intestine metastases are notable, and several associated mechanisms have been raised as follows : (1) the intestine
has abundant immune protection with numerous lymphoid cells and large secretions of IgA in the mucosa and submucosa of the intestine; (2) a
rapid refresh rate of small intestinal mucosa may inhibit the tumorigenesis; (3) liquefied chyme may cause less mucosal irritation, then
reduces mechanical injury and inflammation . In general, a small intestine and sigmoid colon metastatic tumor indicates a poor prognosis.
Bleeding and obstruction, as well as non-specific symptoms such as abdominal discomfort, gas distension, and vomiting, are common clinical
features. Some reasons may cause a misdiagnosis and delay the treatment: (1) non-specific gastrointestinal symptoms may easily be seen as a
symptom of tumor progression or adverse drug reaction; (2) lack of awareness of metastatic tumor; (3) ordinary CT scanners cannot find
minimal lesions, especially in the small intestine. Once intestine metastasis is suspected, contrast-enhanced CT, endoscope, and even
exploratory laparotomy should be operated. Typical features of intestinal metastases include intestinal wall thickening and stiffness,
submucosal spread, and ulcers. Typically, metastases are submucosal or subserosal, which make the primary and secondary tumors easily
distinguishable; besides, cytokeratin immunohistochemistry may help to differentiate the two. Metastatic cervical carcinoma is usually
positive for CK7, epithelial membrane antigen, and CK5/6 and negative for CK20 . The treatment for a small intestine and sigmoid colon
metastatic tumor from cervical squamous cell carcinoma remains debatable because of the lack of enough cases to compare the efficacy of
different treatments. Laparotomy seems to be the common choice if the patients are physically capable (Table 2). Chemotherapy could also be
employed as a palliative treatment. This report presents a rare case of small intestine and sigmoid colon metastases of cervical cancer that
caused obstruction. Clinicians should be aware that intestine metastasis must be considered in the differential diagnosis of acute abdomen
in patients with cervical cancer even at an early tumor stage. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this Case report and any accompanying images. This report adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. computed tomography
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics magnetic resonance imaging squamous cell carcinoma antigen Xiuyan Yu and Zhen Wang
contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions XY
and ZW contributed equally to the manuscript. JH is the corresponding author of the manuscript. XY participated in the design of the study.
ZW reviewed the literature. ZZ collected the patient’s data and provided the figures. XY, ZW, YL were involved in drafting the manuscript.
JH revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to thank the members of the group for
useful discussions and Dr. Dang Wu for language assistance. The work was supported by grants from the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. Y15H160095). Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of the study.
