Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 36 Final Diagnosis: Multiple concomitant right upper limb fractures Symptoms:
— Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Open reduction and internal fixation of right upper limb fractures Specialty: Orthopedics and
Traumatology Rare co-existance of disease or pathology This report is about unusual multiple upper extremity concomitant injuries in an
adult after a fall from a height. To the best of our knowledge this is the first reported case of concomitant ipsilateral occurrence of
multiple common injuries, uncommonly occurring together in a single traumatic episode. A 36-year-old right-handed man fell through a
skylight to the floor about 4 meters below. He presented with multiple concomitant injuries in his right upper extremity: elbow dislocation
with radial head fracture associated with distal radius, ulnar styloid, and scaphoid fractures. The probable mechanism of injury along with
the surgical treatment of these previously undescribed injuries is discussed to emphasize the need to clinically examine the whole upper
extremity in severe injuries. The awareness of such an association for early recognition is paramount for excellent clinical results. The
elbow joint is the second most commonly dislocated joint in adults after the shoulder joint . Usually the mechanism of injury is a fall on
an outstretched hand, which leads to disruption of the ligaments and soft tissues around the elbow, which result in loss of the static
stabilizers of the ulnohumeral joint . Posterior elbow dislocation is associated with other injuries in around 10–15% of cases, radial head
fracture being one of them . Distal radius fracture is the most common fracture treated by orthopedic surgeons . The most common carpal bone
fracture is scaphoid fracture and other upper limb fractures are associated with it in 5–10% of the cases . Like distal radius fracture,
scaphoid fracture usually results from a fall on the extended wrist or a forced dorsiflexion injury of the wrist . Various combinations of
upper extremity injuries have been reported in the literature ; however, to the best of our knowledge the combination presented in this
paper has never been reported. This case is reported to stress the need to search for possible missed injuries in a severely injured
patient. A 36-year-old right-handed man fell about four meters through a skylight while trying to repair his own satellite. On arrival to
the emergency room (ER), his right elbow was in an awkward position supported by his left wrist. He could not recall how he impacted the
ground. He denied any history of loss of consciousness. There was no history of previous trauma to his right upper limb or use of long –
term medication. He gave history of smoking 60 cigarettes per day. His right elbow was markedly deformed with gross swelling. There were
mild superficial abrasions over the dorsal side of his right mid forearm and the ulnar side of his right wrist. Elbow and wrist were tender
to touch with inability to move the right elbow. There was mild crepitation noted over his right wrist. His neurovascular examination was
normal. Radiographic examination of the right elbow showed posterolateral elbow dislocation with radial head fracture (Figure 1A, 1B). Wrist
radiographs showed a dorsally displaced metaphyseal distal radius fracture with mild metaphyseal comminution and ulnar styloid fracture
(Figure 2A, 2B). In the ER a trial of elbow closed reduction under conscious sedation failed. His elbow and wrist were immobilized in an
above-elbow posterior slab. Informed consent was taken and the patient was prepared for an urgent operative intervention. Under general
anesthesia with the patient in supine position, the elbow was reduced under image intensifier (I I) control. Examining the elbow range of
motion under I I revealed widening of the ulnohumeral joint and a mildly displaced radial head fracture. The presence of joint widening and
a displaced radial head fracture were the indication for an open ligament repair with stabilization or excision of the radial head fracture
. Examination of the wrist under I I revealed a middle third scaphoid fracture (Figure 3A, 3B), which was missed in the initial assessment
in ER, in addition to the distal radius fracture with the tip of ulnar styloid fracture. The elbow was approached through a posterior
approach just lateral to the tip of the olecranon with elevation of a lateral-based full fasciocutaneous flap. The fractured radial head-
piece was excised (Figure 4), as it was a thin osteocartilaginous piece that was difficult to stabilize. A complete avulsion of the lateral
collateral ligament (LCL) from the lateral humeral condyle was noticed along with partial avulsion of the common extensor origin. The LCL
and the extensor origin were repaired using suture anchors (GII Quick Anchor plus, DePuy Synthes, Mitek Sport Medicine) (Figure 5A, 5B). The
distal radius fracture was stabilized through a volar approach using a volar distal radius plate and screws (Volar 2.4 mm LCP Distal Radius
System, DePuy Synthes). The scaphoid was stabilized with a mini screw (2.4 mm Cortex Screw, DePuy Synthes) (Figure 6A, 6B); the distal
radioulnar joint was found stable so it was decided not to stabilize the ulnar styloid fracture. The elbow was found to be stable with
concentric reduction under I I after the repair, so a long arm cast including the thumb with the forearm in pronation was applied. The cast
was kept on for three weeks and then a custom-made hinged elbow brace extending to the wrist and thumb was applied where he was allowed to
flex and extend his elbow while keeping the forearm in pronation for another six weeks. Patient started to perform elbow and forearm range
of motion exercises, including forearm rotation, after brace removal. Scaphoid cast was kept on for a total of 12 weeks to protect the
scaphoid and distal radius (Figure 6A, 6B). He was closely followed up by a physiotherapist to recover his wrist and elbow range of motion.
An occupational therapist was involved to help the patient regain his hand function and grip power. The patient was followed up for about 18
months, during which he regained almost near normal range of motion compared to the normal side (Figure 7A–7F]. One can only speculate on
the exact mechanism of injury in this case since the injury was not witnessed and the patient could not recall it. Posterolateral elbow
dislocation may occur secondary to an elbow joint valgus injury combined with axial load and supination . Widening of the ulnohumeral joint
following closed reduction of a dislocated elbow may be a result of an entrapped osteochondral fragment or soft tissue interposition in
which surgical intervention is indicated . Joint widening may also be a sign of persistent subluxation, which will eventually lead to
recurrent instability and arthritis if not treated . Keeping the forearm in pronation after elbow reduction adds to the stability of the
repair when the LCL complex is disrupted, like in the current case . Early reduction of elbow dislocation followed by rigid stabilization of
the associated fractures can result in early return to work and better outcome. Concomitant fractures of distal radius and scaphoid are due
to high-energy trauma; the combination of both fractures is uncommon and the combination of both with elbow dislocation and fractured head
of the radius is even less common. If one or both fractures are displaced, then internal stabilization of both fractures followed by early
rehabilitation program will give the most favorable outcome . The important message here, especially for the junior staff dealing with
trauma cases, is that although we are taught during training that to reduce the incidence of missed associated injuries when we find one
injury we need to look for associated injuries, and usually there are known associations of injuries that occur together, in severe high-
energy trauma cases one should look for associated injuries and should not stop after finding one concomitant injury, but should complete a
thorough examination of the patient and obtain the appropriate x-rays to rule out the occurrence of more injuries in the same limb or other
body parts. The reported association in this report is one more association to look for in similar cases. It could be the nature of this
high- energy fall onto an outstretched upper extremity that contributed to this patient’s rare combination of injuries. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first case report with these concomitant injuries in one upper extremity. Knowledge of this unusual presentation with
a high index of suspicion is important in recognizing such a combination. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Initial X-rays in Emergency Department, anteroposterior (A) and lateral (B) views of right elbow showing posterolateral
elbow dislocation with radial head fracture. Initial x-rays in Emergency Department, anteroposterior (A) and lateral (B) views of right
wrist showing comminuted fracture distal radius. Intraoperative anteroposterior (A) and lateral (B) wrist views under image intensifier
showing fracture distal radius, middle third scaphoid, and ulnar styloid tip. Intraoperative anteroposterior elbow view under image
intensifier showing radial head fracture. Anteroposterior (A) and lateral (B) elbow views showing congruent elbow joint reduction, post
repair of the lateral collateral ligament, extensor origin, and excision of the radial head fragment. Anteroposterior (A) and lateral (B)
wrist views showing healed distal radius and scaphoid fractures. Note: the ulnar styloid was not stabilized. Clinical appearance of right
upper limb range of motion 16 months postoperatively showing excellent range of motion; elbow extension (A) and flexion (B), wrist
dorsiflexion (C) and palmar flexion (D), forearm supination (E) and pronation (F).
