Intracranial silicone oil is a rare complication of intraocular endotamponade with silicone oil. We describe a case of intraventricular
silicone oil fortuitously observed 38 months after an intraocular tamponade for a complicated retinal detachment in an 82 year-old woman
admitted in the Department of Neurology for a stroke. We confirm the migration of silicone oil along the optic nerve. We discuss this rare
entity with a review of the few other cases reported in the medical literature. Intraventricular migration of silicone oil after intraocular
endotamponade is usually asymptomatic but have to be known of the neurologists and the radiologists because of its differential diagnosis
that are intraventricular hemorrhage and tumor. Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment occurs when there is a separation of the neurosensory
retina from the retinal pigment epithelium with accumulation of subretinal fluid, in the presence of 1 or more retinal breaks: in the
absence of treatment, it may cause severe visual loss.1 For ∼40 years, silicone oil is accepted as a safe and effective treatment used as an
intraocular tamponade in the pars plana vitrectomy repair of retinal detachment; unlike gas tamponade, intraocular silicone oil injection
allows prolonged tamponade because it is not absorbed. However, silicone oil can migrate into the anterior chamber of the eye and can
accumulate in the peri-orbit (rarely in the subconjunctival space) after escaping the eye through sclerotomies.2 Intracranial migration of
silicone oil has rarely been described. We report a fortuitous observation of intraventricular migration of silicone oil in a patient who
was admitted for a stroke. An 82-year-old Caucasian woman was initially admitted in our hospital for a sudden left hemiparesia. Her medical
history consisted in atrial fibrillation (with anticoagulants) and cardiac pacing. She also suffered of a complicated retinal detachment on
the left eye 38 months earlier (treated with intraocular silicone oil injection of 1300 centistokes): preoperative ocular was 22 mm Hg;
because of this severe chronic retinal detachment (with retinovitreous retraction), precise visualization of the retina was difficult. The
clinical examination confirmed a motor mild weakness of her left hemibody. She did not complain of headache. Right eye vision and the
cranial nerves were normal. General examination and skin examination were normal as well. Ancillary tests showed any abnormality. Because of
the cardiac pacing, we were unable to perform a brain MRI. So, she underwent a brain CT-scan at admission: we observed 2 intraventricular
spontaneous hyperdensities (Figure 1). Cervical extracranial arteries duplex sonography revealed a stenosis (> 70%) of the left internal
carotid artery. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the cervical arteries confirmed a stenosis (84%) of the left internal carotid artery. At day 2,
we repeat the noncontrast-enhanced brain CT scan: we confirmed the infarct in the territory of the right middle cerebral artery, but also
spontaneous migrations of the intraventricular hyperdensities (Figure 1). Silicone oil was visible in the left ocular globe (Figure 1E),
with a density of 98 Hounsfield units (HU), but also along the left optic nerve (Figure 1E) where the density was 75 HU (in comparison of
the right optic nerve where density was only 42 HU). For the spontaneous moving hyperdensities the density was quite the same that for the
left ocular globe. These spontaneous hyperdensities were finally characteristic of the intraventricular migration of silicone oil.
Ophthalmological examination confirmed ocular hypertension (35 mm Hg) without intraocular emulsified silicone oil. The patient died 3 months
later of cardiac troubles. Day 0 (A, B) and day 2 (C, D) axial noncontrast-enhanced brain CT scans (same sections: A = C; B = D) showing
moving intraventricular hyperdensities (arrows) and a cerebral infarction (star). E: hyperdensity of the left optic nerve (arrow) and the
left ocular globe. CT = computed tomography. Although considered as a safe agent, the tolerance of silicone oil has been repeatedly
questioned. It is well known that this foreign material may lead to serious intraocular complications (intraconjonctival oil inclusion
cysts, band keratopathy, emulsification of oil with secondary glaucoma, cataract formation, and subretinal migration of oil), but also
severe optic neuropathy caused by retrolaminar migration.3 In comparison with Schnabel's cavernous degeneration, a spongiform appearance of
the proximal optic nerve due to focal loss of myelin and axons (with the preservation of septa), the process of infiltration of silicone
within the optic nerve is called “pseudo-Schnabel's cavernous degeneration”: this phenomenon may be due to an increase of the intraocular
pressure;4 it was also proposed that deep cupping of the optic disk may allow the silicone oil to enter the subarachnoid spaces (by breaking
through the cerebral pia).5 By finding silicone bubbles in the optic nerve (and subarachnoidal spaces surrounding this nerve) after having
analyzed an enucleated eye treated with silicone oil, it was confirmed that silicone may infiltrate the central nervous system.6 However,
the frequency of the intracranial migration of intraocular silicone oil seems to be very low, as showed in a study where no case of
intracranial silicone oil was observed in a series 19 consecutive patients several months (minimum delay of 2 months) after intraocular
injection of silicone oil.7 To date, with ours, only 12 cases of intracranial migration of silicone oil were reported5,8–17 (Table 1). In 10
patients, the silicone oil was present in the ventricles, always in lateral ventricles and sometimes in the third (1 patient) and fourth
ventricles (2 patients); only half of the patients (6) presented high density of the optic nerve (1 patient had optic nerve hyperdensity
without intraventricular silicone oil); the time for the observation of silicone oil (mostly fortuitous) varied from 6 to 120 months.
Sometimes, patients presented with a specific headache or dizziness; 1 patient presented with seizures. In all cases, there was no surgery.
Cases of Intracranial Silicone Oil Migration After Endotamponade With Injection of Silicone Oil In our patient, an intraocular silicone oil
injection was performed 38 months earlier by using a particularly viscous fluid (1300 centistokes). On brain CT-scans the silicone oil was
observed not only in the left ocular globe and the cerebral ventricles, but also along the left optic nerve, suggesting a migration of
silicone oil in intracerebral ventricles along the optic nerve. Intraventricular silicone oil has a lower specific gravity as compared to
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), explaining its free-floating nature. Because of a high surface tension, its intraventricular configuration is
usually spherical, conversely to hemorrhage that presents a fluid-fluid level.14 Silicone oil is transparent but radiodense, with a CT
attenuation of 106 to 139 HU that is supposedly slightly higher than in hemorrhages (50–90 HU). However, and similarly to other clinical
cases,16 even in the ocular globe this type of discrimination was not possible for us to achieve, given the fact that silicone oil density
was inferior to 100 HU. One hypothesis to explain this relatively low density is a dilution of the silicone oil with CSF.14 Due to cardiac
pacing, we were unable to perform brain MRI in our patient; that much said, brain imaging could confirm the previously mentioned migration
diagnosis.16 Brain MRI may detect small droplets of silicone of 1 mm3 (or larger)7 that are hyperintense on T1-weighted images but with a
variable signal intensity on T2-weighted images (iso-, hypo-, or hyperintense).8 Intraventricular migration of intraocular silicone oil has
to be known of neurologists, ophthalmologists, and radiologists, even if it is of rare occurrence. It is a rare complication due to the
migration of this material along the optic nerve, as shown in our case. Brain imaging may lead to the good diagnosis by demonstrating high
attenuation on CT-scan (and hyperintensity on T1-weighted MRI) and a moving pattern when imaging is repeated: the recognition of this
unusual combination of imaging characteristics may help to distinguish it from tumor or hemorrhage. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography,
HU = Hounsfield unit, mm Hg = millimeter of mercury, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. Contributorship statement: SM and JC drafted the
manuscript; MB managed the retinal detachment and ophtalmological follow-up; CS and JPT performed the radiological studies; JPN critically
reviewed the manuscript for important intellectual content. Disclosure: The authors have no disclosures to report. The authors have no
conflicts of interest to disclose. Ethics committee approval: Informed consent was obtained from the patient, but this case report do not
required a ethics committee approval according to the current laws in our Hospital.
