JS wrote the initial draft of the paper. MH, IP, SH, VH and DF all subsequently added significant contributions to the final document The
ability to provide oxygen in a patient’s home can offer enormous benefits, including improvements in life expectancy when given in the
appropriate setting. Confusingly, however, home oxygen is available in many forms, including long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT), ambulatory
oxygen therapy (AOT), palliative oxygen therapy (POT) and short-burst oxygen therapy (SBOT)—each with varying degrees of supporting
evidence. The British Thoracic Society (BTS) has recently published new guidance on home oxygen therapy, after collating the available
evidence. This article aims to summarise those guidelines, focusing on who should and should not be considered for oxygen therapy. Although
the BTS guidelines target a UK audience, many of the principles covered below are applicable internationally, even if the availability of
certain oxygen modalities and supporting service arrangements may vary between different healthcare systems. A 63-year-old retired
shopkeeper attends for his annual chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) review. He was diagnosed 3 years ago following a 40 pack-year
history of smoking, and since then he has been managed with tiotropium. His exercise tolerance was initially reasonable, but it has recently
fallen to 410 m. As a result, he has lost confidence and become less independent. One of his friends suggested that he ask for home oxygen
to help with his symptoms. His spirometry shows moderate airflow obstruction (FEV1 1.5 l or 51% predicted, FVC 2.7 l or 91% predicted and
FEV1/FVC ratio 56%). His oxygen saturation is 96% on air. This is a typical COPD presentation, with first symptoms occurring in late
adulthood following a significant smoking history and accompanied by supporting changes on spirometry. In this context, patients often
experience frightening and debilitating breathlessness. Of note, his saturations remain well preserved on air (i.e., >92%), demonstrating
that he is not hypoxaemic at rest. What is the role, if any, of oxygen in this setting? The British Thoracic Society (BTS) oxygen guideline
summarises the evidence for, and provides recommendation on, the different options for home oxygen therapy (listed in Table 1).1 Box 1
summarises the key recommendations from the guideline. Previously, both short-burst oxygen therapy (SBOT) and ambulatory oxygen therapy
(AOT) have been considered for nonhypoxaemic patients with disabling breathlessness. The evidence to support this, however, is limited. SBOT
refers to the intermittent use of oxygen for short periods (typically 10–20 min) immediately before or after exercise, with the intention of
relieving breathlessness and speeding up recovery. Although SBOT has been offered for many years, several recent studies show a lack of
efficacy in terms of improving exercise tolerance, recovery time or breathlessness.2–5 Many of these studies were randomised and double-
blinded, using air and/or fan therapy as comparators. Studies included both hypoxaemic and non-hypoxaemic patients but failed to show
benefit in either group. Given these data, the guidelines conclude that there is no therapeutic role for SBOT in either hypoxaemic or non-
hypoxaemic COPD patients. AOT is the use of oxygen delivered via a portable cylinder during exercise and other exertion, such as activities
of daily living. Historically, AOT has been used in mobile patients who are not hypoxaemic at rest but who desaturate on exercise, with the
aim of improving oxygen saturations and exercise capacity. A number of lab-based studies suggest that AOT may improve certain physiological
parameters during supervised exercise.6 However, longer-term ‘real-life’ clinical trials of AOT used at home/community suggest that AOT
offers no substantial long-term benefits and is often under-utilised.7,8 Appropriate use of domiciliary oxygen relies on successful patient
engagement—this is a particular issue with AOT where patients can feel self-conscious leaving the house with visible, and often heavy,
oxygen equipment. Given the lack of long-term data, there is therefore insufficient evidence to support routine use of AOT in COPD patients
who do not fulfil the criteria for LTOT. Despite the lack of evidence, it is recognised that a small proportion of patients with
debilitating breathlessness and reduced exercise capacity due to hypoxaemia may engage with using AOT and may benefit from it. This is
particularly relevant in other non-COPD chronic lung diseases (e.g., pulmonary fibrosis) in which patients more often tend to desaturate
substantially on exercise. The guidelines therefore allow motivated patients to be considered for a trial of AOT following formal assessment
by a specialist home oxygen assessment service, once all other medical interventions have been optimised.1 These patients should only
continue if they can demonstrate benefit from, and good compliance with, therapy. It is important to help the patient understand why he is
breathless and that oxygen is a treatment for low oxygen levels, not breathlessness. Alternative strategies for relieving breathlessness are
listed in Box 2. If the patient is still smoking, then treating his tobacco dependence is paramount. Lifestyle changes, such as increasing
activity levels and losing weight, can also improve breathlessness. Referral to a local pulmonary rehabilitation program is crucial, as it
can improve breathlessness and exercise tolerance, as well as offer disease education and self-management skills. Ensure that his inhaled
therapy is optimised by checking his inhaler technique, addressing any adherence issues and consider adding a LABA. According to
availability, refer to a community respiratory team, or other specialist respiratory service, to provide ongoing support. There may be a
role for specific mental health support for those with a high anxiety component or low mood. Finally, he should be put in contact with a
local patient association (e.g., in the UK, BreatheEasy groups are local peer support groups sponsored by the British Lung Foundation
(BLF)), which can offer further local support. LTOT, i.e., oxygen administered for ⩾15 h/day for patients who are chronically hypoxaemic,
remains the most evidence-based form of domiciliary oxygen in use. The evidence for LTOT centres around two landmark RCTs carried out in the
1980s, which both showed a survival benefit in COPD patients that only became apparent after several years of use.9,10 At present, smoking
cessation and LTOT are the only two interventions known to improve survival outcomes in COPD. The same gentleman has been under your care
for a further 5 years. During this time, he has become much more limited and now has an exercise tolerance of 100 m. He has experienced
several exacerbations and has been admitted twice in the last year. He attends for a routine review 3 weeks after his most recent admission.
His spirometry has continued to deteriorate (FEV1 0.6 l or 23% predicted) and he is now hypoxaemic (saturations 91% on air). Unfortunately,
he has also started smoking again Given the evidence for LTOT, it is important that potential candidates be screened and referred in a
timely manner. It is therefore recommended that all patients be screened within their annual COPD assessment. Patients whose resting
saturations are ⩽92% on air during a period of stability should be referred to their local home oxygen service for a formal assessment with
arterial blood gas sampling. LTOT should only be prescribed by specialists after a comprehensive review, and it is not something that should
be initiated in primary care. The need to identify patients early must be balanced against the potential for overprescribing LTOT to
‘unstable’ patients who have not yet fully recovered from an exacerbation.11 Patients should therefore not be screened for LTOT until they
are ⩾8 weeks clear of an exacerbation—thus, our patient would need to be rescreened in 5 weeks’ time. Oxygen is a medicine used to treat
hypoxia. Similar to any drug, the appropriate dose for an individual patient needs to be considered, and it can vary. Patients referred to a
home oxygen service will undergo a comprehensive assessment including checking blood gases that will determine whether oxygen is required,
and at what level it should be administered. The home oxygen assessment service will ensure that the patient does not become hypercapnic on
oxygen and will complete the appropriate documentation (e.g., in the UK a Home Oxygen Order Form or HOOF), prescribing the required flow
rate for the patient’s LTOT. This is typically delivered via nasal prongs for ⩾15 h/day through an oxygen concentrator installed in the
patient’s home. Patients who use their oxygen for less than this amount are unlikely to see any survival benefits. Those who are mobile
outdoors may be offered AOT in addition to LTOT to enable them to accumulate sufficient hours of LTOT usage per day,12 and will undergo
further assessment to determine whether a higher flow rate is needed during exercise. The home oxygen assessment team will also educate the
patient and carers and work with the home oxygen supplier to make sure that a comprehensive risk assessment has been completed in the
patient’s home. Patients will be informed of their responsibility to use oxygen safely, including abstinence from smoking (at the very least
while using the oxygen). The home oxygen team should also identify patients at risk of harm from excessive oxygen, for example, during an
ambulance transfer, and ensure that care plans and/or alerts are in place to address this. Commencing LTOT is a key milestone in any
patient's disease trajectory. Not only will the treatment have a huge impact on their life and that of their carers but the need for LTOT
also signifies advanced disease—this carries advance care planning implications that may need to be considered. It is not known whether
patients who continue to smoke receive any survival benefit from LTOT. As current smoking is the main driver of premature mortality and
adverse outcomes in COPD, there are theoretical and physiological reasons why these patients are unlikely to have the same benefit—however,
33–48% of patients included in the original landmark LTOT trials were current smokers at the time of recruitment. Notwithstanding any
possible lack of benefit, the main concern over current smoking and LTOT is the potential for great harm, not only to the individual but
also to carers, co-habitants and others.13 Up to 25% of all oxygen- and smoking-related domestic fires result in death and 33% in serious
injury.14 The current guideline leaves the final decision regarding oxygen prescription with individual clinicians, but it does offer
practical advice for home oxygen services around risk estimation and mitigation. Just as prescriptions of nephrotoxic drugs are modified in
patients with renal impairment because of the potential for harm, so any decision on home oxygen prescription needs to balance the potential
clinical benefit against the risk of harm on a case-by-case basis. A 58-year-old office worker has been under an oncologist for 8 years with
breast cancer. Her disease has repeatedly progressed despite several chemotherapy regimens. She now has advanced disease with pulmonary
metastases and is under supportive care only. Her husband contacts you shortly after her last oncology assessment to report that she now has
debilitating breathlessness. When you visit her she is breathless on minimal exertion but still has a well-preserved saturation (94% on
air). She asks whether she should have home oxygen. Assuming that the oncology team has excluded all treatable pathologies (e.g., infection,
PE, pulmonary embolism, anaemia), the aim of management is to offer symptom control in a minimally intrusive way. In this setting, is there
a role for palliative oxygen therapy (POT)—i.e., oxygen to relieve dyspnoea in a life-limiting disease in which all reversible causes have
been treated? A number of studies, including a large RCT, have found no symptomatic benefit in non-hypoxaemic patients from supplementary
oxygen over medical air.15,16 One study, however, demonstrated that opioids can control dyspnoea more effectively than oxygen.17 Fan therapy
has also been reported to be helpful. Current guidance therefore suggests that oxygen is not indicated in dyspnoeic patients with life-
limiting illness who are non-hypoxaemic, and that a trial of opioids or fan therapy should be offered instead.1 The same lady has remained
poorly, but stable, for a further 6 weeks. A community matron routinely visits her and reports that her symptoms are unchanged but her
saturations are now lower at 89% on air. Is home oxygen indicated now? This lady is now hypoxaemic, presumably because of disease
progression. Assuming that there is no evidence of any new treatable pathology, should oxygen be considered now? Unlike LTOT, the aim of
management here is simply to provide symptom relief, not to improve life expectancy. With this in mind, the available evidence, albeit
limited, suggests that POT does not confer any symptomatic benefit over air in hypoxaemic patients.18 Again, opioids appear to be more
effective at improving symptoms in this setting.17 Many non-pharmacological-based interventions can also help, from the simple use of
room/handheld fans to positioning and reassurance. POT should therefore not be offered routinely in either hypoxaemic or non-hypoxaemic
patients with life-limiting disease. POT may, however, be considered occasionally in either patient group by a specialist palliative care
team when intractable breathlessness persists and all other treatments have been tried. The response to POT should be formally assessed, and
therapy should be discontinued if no symptomatic relief is obtained. This article has demonstrated that oxygen should be considered a
treatment for hypoxaemia, not breathlessness, and thus it has little role in the non-hypoxaemic patient. Conversely, robust evidence exists
for the use of LTOT in chronically hypoxaemic patients where it confers a significant long-term survival benefit. These patients need
specialist assessment and follow-up by a local home oxygen assessment service. There is little evidence to support the routine use of other
forms of oxygen such as SBOT, AOT or POT in patients who do not qualify for LTOT. Funding The authors declare that no funding was received.
The authors declare no conflict of interest. Oxygen is a treatment for hypoxaemia, not breathlessness Home oxygen prescriptions need
specialist review—refer to your local home oxygen assessment team, rather than prescribing in primary care Long-term oxygen therapy (LTOT)
can improve survival in stable COPD patients who remain chronically hypoxic Short-burst oxygen therapy (SBOT) is ineffective and should not
be ordered Ambulatory oxygen therapy (AOT) is unlikely to provide long-term benefits in the majority of patients with exertional dyspnoea
and should not be routinely ordered Palliative oxygen therapy (POT) is not as effective as opiates in controlling dyspnoea in life-limiting
disease and should only be ordered when all other options have been explored. Oxygen is a treatment for hypoxaemia, not breathlessness Home
oxygen prescriptions need specialist review—refer to your local home oxygen assessment team, rather than prescribing in primary care Long-
term oxygen therapy (LTOT) can improve survival in stable COPD patients who remain chronically hypoxic Short-burst oxygen therapy (SBOT) is
ineffective and should not be ordered Ambulatory oxygen therapy (AOT) is unlikely to provide long-term benefits in the majority of patients
with exertional dyspnoea and should not be routinely ordered Palliative oxygen therapy (POT) is not as effective as opiates in controlling
dyspnoea in life-limiting disease and should only be ordered when all other options have been explored. Options other than oxygen Smoking
cessationLifestyle changes (e.g., increase in activity levels, weight loss)Pulmonary rehabilitationOptimisation of inhaler therapy—choice of
inhaler and inhaler techniqueRefer to the community respiratory teamConsider addressing any mental health issuesPut into contact with a
patient support group Smoking cessation Lifestyle changes (e.g., increase in activity levels, weight loss) Pulmonary rehabilitation
Optimisation of inhaler therapy—choice of inhaler and inhaler technique Refer to the community respiratory team Consider addressing any
mental health issues Put into contact with a patient support group
