Tumour-induced osteomalacia (TIO) is a rare paraneoplastic syndrome characterised by severe hypophosphataemia and osteomalacia, with renal
phosphate wasting that occurs in association with tumour. The epidemiology likewise aetiology is not known. The clinical presentation of TIO
includes bone fractures, bone and muscular pains, and sometimes height and weight loss. TIO may be associated with mesenchymal tumours which
may be benign or malignant in rare cases. Mesenchymal tumour itself may be related to fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), which is
responsible for hypophosphataemia and phosphaturia occurring in this paraneoplastic syndrome. Hypophosphataemia, phosphaturia and elevated
alkaline phosphatase are the main laboratory readings that may lead to more precise investigations and better diagnosis. Finding the tumour
can be a major diagnostic challenge and may involve total body magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography and scintigraphy using
radiolabelled somatostatin analogue. The treatment of choice for TIO is resection of a tumour with a wide margin to insure complete tumour
removal, as recurrences of these tumours have been reported. We provide here an overview on the current available TIO case reports and
review the best practices that may lead to earlier recognition of TIO and the subsequent treatment thereof, even though biochemical
background and the long-term prognosis of the disease are not well understood. This review also includes a 4-year-long history of a patient
that featured muscular pains, weakness and multiple stress fractures localised in the hips and vertebra with subsequent recovery after
tumour resection. Because the occurrence of such a condition is rare, it may take years to correctly diagnose the disease, as is reported in
this case report. Tumour-induced osteomalacia (TIO) is a rare paraneoplastic syndrome clinical presentation of which includes bone
fractures, bone and muscular pains, and sometimes loss of height and even weight. Weight loss is unusual, but sometimes observed, and could
be explained by general debilitated state of the patient with consequent poor nutrient intake and loss of muscle mass [1, 2]. Most of them
are believed to be benign, although cases judged to be histopathologically malignant have been also described . Mesenchymal tumour itself
may be related to fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), which is responsible for hypophosphataemia and phosphaturia occurring in this
paraneoplastic syndrome. Hypophosphataemia, phosphaturia and elevated alkaline phosphatase are the main laboratory readings that may lead to
more precise investigations and better diagnosis. Although several hundreds of cases have been reported since 1947 when McCance et al.
described the first TIO case , majority of clinicians, radiologists and pathologists are not aware of this rare disease with only several
cases described in rheumatology practice [5, 6, 8–14]. We provide an overview of the current literature available on TIO case reports and
review the best practice for the diagnosis and treatment. We also present here a 4-year-long case study of a patient who was eventually
diagnosed with TIO. We report the initial presentation of the disease and the steps leading to TIO diagnosis. TIO is characterised by severe
hypophosphataemia and osteomalacia, with renal phosphate wasting that occurs in association with tumour. TIO also is called oncogenic
hypophosphatemic osteomalacia (M83.8) and appears in the portal for rare diseases and orphan drugs under that name (ORPHA352540). It was
first described in 1947 by Robert McCance, who reported a patient with pain, weakness, gait abnormalities, and low phosphorus levels. The
patient was treated with high doses of vitamin D, but the symptoms did not completely resolve until a tumour in femur bone was removed . The
first person to clearly recognise that the disease was the result of a “rachitogenic” substance was Andrea Prader. In 1959, he described an
11 1/2-year-old girl who developed severe rickets over the course of a year. Evaluation showed decreased tubular phosphate reabsorption but
otherwise normal kidney function. A tumour, classified as a giant cell granuloma, was identified in a rib and removed resulting in healing
of rickets . The prevalence of the disease is not known. Since the association between phosphate reabsorption and tumour was first made,
more than 300 cases of TIO have been reported in the literature . The first evidence of a circulating factor that could cause phosphate
wasting in phosphaturic disorders such as TIO was demonstrated in a set of experiments in mice by Meyer et al. and Nesbitt et al. [17, 18].
The first evidence to support this concept in humans was the experiment by Miyauchi et al. in which a tumour removed from a patient and
transplanted into nude mice caused hypophosphatemia . FGF23 was first identified as the phosphaturic substance when mutations in FGF23 were
linked to autosomal-dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR) [20, 21]. Soon after that, elevations in serum FGF23 were found in TIO and it
was shown that FGF23 binds to target proximal tubule cells via FGF receptor and inhibits renal phosphate reabsorption . The primary
transport protein responsible for phosphate reabsorption in the kidney is the type II sodium-phosphate co-transporters (NaPi-IIa and NaPi-
IIc) localised in the proximal tubule. High circulating FGF-23 levels reduce the expression of the co-transporters, leading to renal
phosphate wasting [16, 22–24]. FGF23 is also a regulatory hormone for 1.25-vitamin D and leads to a decreased concentration of the vitamin
in blood . Excessive FGF23 action causes several hypophosphatemic diseases, including TIO, X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (XLHR),
autosomal dominant and recessive hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR and ARHR) . Under physiological conditions, FGF23 is secreted predominantly
by bone and undergoes degradation by proteolytic enzymes . By contrast, tumours secrete FGF23 to concentrations that are several hundred-
fold higher than normal levels, leading to dysregulation of FGF23 degradation pathway . The tumours associated with TIO are usually small
and mesenchymal in origin . The prototypical phosphaturic mesenchymal tumour (mixed connective tissue variant) contains neoplastic cells
that are spindled to stellate in shape, normochromatic with small nuclei and indistinct nucleoli. The nuclear grade is low, and mitotic
activity is usually absent or very low. The cells are typically embedded within a myxoid or myxo-chondroid matrix with “grungy”
calcification that can resemble chondroid or osteoid. Numerous osteoclast-like giant cells are a frequent finding, and mature fat and even
lamellar bone may also be seen. A prominent feature of these tumours is an elaborate intrinsic microvasculature with an admixture of vessel
size and vascular pattern . The most common diagnosis for these tumours has been hemangiopericytoma, but it has also included hemangioma,
sarcomas, ossifying fibromas, granulomas, giant cell tumours and osteoblastomas. Weidner in 1991 was the first to propose a classification
system based on the histological findings of 16 cases of TIO and designated the tumours as phosphaturic mesenchymal tumours . TIO tumours
can be further subdivided into four categories: mixed connective tissue variant (phosphaturic mesenchymal tumour mixed connective tissue
variant—PMTMCT), osteoblastoma-like variant, non-ossifying fibroma-like variant, and ossifying fibroma-like variant. The PMTMCT group is
diagnosed in 70–80 % of TIO cases and comprises neoplasias containing primitive stromal cells, prominent vessel, and osteoclast-like giant
cells. PMTMCT tumours usually occur in bones or soft tissues and are typically benign in behaviour, but malignant variants have already been
described. Malignant examples show frankly sarcomatous features, such as a high nuclear grade, high cellularity, elevated mitotic activity
and necrosis [3, 6, 22, 32]. The remaining three groups tend to occur in bones and were also typically benign in behaviour. When testing
antigen expression, FGF23 is positive in about 70 % of all the cases studied, and the proliferating cells within the tumour are usually the
source of FGF23 . Somatostatin receptors have also been found to be present in many TIO tumours . While typically benign, malignant
presentation and metastases can occur [4, 5, 36]. While metastases are rare, infiltration of surrounding connective tissue is typically
present, which has significant implications for surgical management and emphasises importance for wide surgical margins to avoid persistence
or reoccurrence. Regardless of tumour morphology, the hallmark of the diagnosis is the association of the tumour with the clinical syndrome
of TIO, which includes an elevation in plasma FGF23 and its disappearance after tumour resection. Quoting Jiang et al. who reviewed 308
tumour-induced osteomalacia cases reported in English literature between 1987 and 2011, about 46 % of reported cases of TIO have occurred in
females and 56 % in males, with a mean age of 45.3 years when definitive diagnosis was made . Within the reported cases TIO, tumours
originate in bones (40 %) and soft tissues (55 %). Most tumours are reported to occur in the thigh and femur (22.7 %), craniofacial region
(20.7 %), ankle and foot (8.8 %), pelvis (8.2 %), tibia and fibula (6.5 %) and arms (6.5 %). The less common locations are the vertebra,
knee, hand, chest, abdomen, groin, perineum and gluteal region [3, 37, 38]. Some tumours can even be located in organs such as the liver,
tongue, thyroid and lungs [1, 3, 4, 39]. A few patients (2 %) are reported as having tumours in more than one site, sometimes representing
metastases . Patients with TIO often present with many years of symptoms before they are diagnosed. The symptoms usually are nonspecific and
often progressive. Common complaints are bone pain, muscle weakness, reduced height, and multiple fractures, primarily in the ribs,
vertebral bodies, and femoral neck [22, 37]. The patients are often misdiagnosed with a variety of musculoskeletal, rheumatologic diseases
and sometimes even psychiatric disorders [16, 40]. Hypophosphatemia caused by impaired renal phosphate reabsorption is the biochemical
hallmark of the disease. Additional laboratory tests can be helpful in making the diagnosis of TIO. The typical biochemical pattern of TIO
includes normal or low levels of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase (reflecting osteoblast hyperactivity and
active bone remodelling) and normal circulating levels of calcium and parathormone (PTH). In some cases, PTH can be particularly high
reflecting secondary hyperparathyroidism, which is a normal response to low 1,25-vitamin D caused by elevated FGF23 [22, 23, 41].
Differential diagnosis should always include renal Fanconi’s syndrome—a disorder of the proximal renal tubules, leading to impaired
phosphate reabsorption and hypophosphatemia. This syndrome may be genetic in origin or it may occur as a complication of myeloma,
amyloidosis, or Sjogren’s syndrome. It can also occur with certain medications or heavy metal poisoning. The diagnosis can be confirmed by
normal levels of FGF23 along with the presence of glycosuria, hypokalaemia, and metabolic acidosis . Once the diagnosis of an
FGF23-dependent, phosphate wasting disorder is made, a thorough history can aid in excluding the genetic causes, such as XLHR, ADHR and
ARHR. Genetic testing can also be done. Having narrowed the diagnosis to TIO, a careful physical examination should be performed, as the
tumours that cause TIO can sometimes be found in the subcutaneous tissue . As tumours can arise in bone or soft tissue, occur from head to
toe and are typically very small in size and slow-growing, locating these tumours is often quite challenging. As a result, the time from
osteomalacia to identifying the associated tumour averages a period of 5 years . Finding the tumours can be a major diagnostic challenge and
may involve total body magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); as tumours can occur anywhere in the body, it is important to scan the whole body,
including extremities, which is often excluded in routine nuclear medicine imaging , computed tomography (CT), scintigraphy using
radiolabelled somatostatin analogue (such as 99mTc-Tektrotyd) and positron emission tomography, with computed tomography: fluorodeoxyglucose
(18F-FDG) PET/CT and galium (68Ga) DOTATATE PET/CT and selective venous sampling for FGF23 . A stepwise approach is advocated, first
performing functional tests. Tumours associated with osteomalacia variably express five somatostatin receptors (SSTR1-5), allowing SSTR-
based functional imaging by somatostatin analogue scintigraphy or positron emission tomography [33, 46, 52, 53]. Octreotide is somatostatin
analogue used in treatment of some neuroendocrine tumours and acromegaly. It is possible to radiolabel the somatostatin analogue in an
attempt to detect tumours that express somatostatin receptors [38, 47, 52]. Octreotide scanning is commonly performed with 111In-labelled
pentatreotide. Octreotide scintigraphy is successfully used to locate tumours in up to 95 % of patients with TIO . It may even be possible
to use this technology therapeutically in radioimmunoguided surgery or labelling of octreotide with a beta-emitting radionuclide . Despite
this success, there are several limitations of this imaging technology. Inflammatory reactions or a fracture will be associated with a
false-positive scan. Somatostatin analogues scintigraphy is also limited by planar two-dimensional imaging and relatively poor spatial
resolution, which is particularly problematic given that TIO tumours are often very small. Single-photon emission tomography (SPECT) or
hybrid SPECT/CT enables three-dimensional imaging and better tumour contrast but is time-consuming and therefore limited to areas of
suspected abnormality rather than a whole body survey . Somatostatin analogue positron emission tomography can dramatically improve the
spatial resolution and lesion detectability . Anatomic imaging (radiography, CT and MRI) should be performed to confirm the location of the
tumour after suspicious lesions had been identified by functional imaging . High-resolution magnetic resonance imaging of the whole body is
the currently proposed method of choice to confirm the location of the tumour . Despite all of the advances in imaging that are available
today, tumour localization may not be successful. If this is the case, imaging studies should be repeated every 1–2 years. The treatment of
choice for TIO is resection of a tumour with a wide margin to insure complete tumour removal, as recurrences of these tumours have been
reported [4, 9, 36]. Tumour removal is always curative, and following complete resection of the tumour, the recovery and improvement of the
patients is relatively quick, FGF23 disappears rapidly from the circulation, and serum phosphate returns to normal by day 5 post operation .
Most patients feel better within days to weeks of tumour removal. Bone healing starts immediately, but depending on the severity of the
disease, it may take up to a year for a more significant clinical improvement to be seen. In case of incompletely resected tumours,
subsequent radiotherapy can be used to avoid recurrence or metastasis (41). Late recurrence due to metastatic disease is rare but possible.
This probably occurs in less than 5 % of the patients with TIO [3, 36]. Lung is a common site for metastasis. The course after metastasis is
quite variable, and survival of up to 30 years has been reported . There is no chemotherapeutic regimen with any demonstrated efficacy in
treating metastatic TIO. Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) has been reported as a possible treatment modality . When the tumour cannot be
localised or is not surgically resectable, medical therapy with phosphate supplementation and calcitriol or alfacalcidol is used. Treatment
with octreotide is an alternative form of medical therapy that may be considered. In one case report, phosphate wasting and hypophosphatemia
were corrected with octreotide therapy; this effect was presumably mediated by somatostatin receptor expression by the tumour, which was
demonstrated by octreotide scintigraphy . However, not all patients respond to octreotide [33, 57]. Treatment with the calcium-sensing
receptor agonist, cinacalcet, could also be effective for the treatment of TIO patients by inducing hypoparathyroidism and thus increasing
renal phosphate reabsorption . Anti-FGF23 antibody is being studied as a novel therapy for FGF23-related hypophosphatemic diseases . Results
of phase I study of single injection of humanized anti-FGF23 antibody for adult patients with XLHR were recently published. This antibody
therapy may be useful for patients with TIO [60, 61]. The prognosis depends on detecting the tumour and possibility to remove it widely. The
tumours when detected are typically benign in most of the cases. The symptoms disappear and the healing of the bones begin after total
removal of the tumour. Nevertheless, the follow-up should be continued because the delayed metastasis can occur as it was described in few
cases. A 48-year-old man was first seen by a rheumatologist in the beginning of 2011 because of progressing weakness, 10 kg weight loss
during the recent year, diminishing height and muscular and bone pain in arms, lower back and chest which severely limited his movements.
The patient felt unhealthy since 2009; however, his life history had no recorded health-related problems except for rib fracture during a
car accident in his childhood and many years of smoking. His family history revealed that his father died of pancreatic cancer, his brother
died of oncohematology condition and his mother lives with oncohematological disease. At the time of investigation, he was 180 cm tall
(being 184 cm when healthy) and weighted 73 kg (BMI = 22.5 kg/m2). Physical examination revealed scoliosis and kyphosis of the spine,
overall weakness, weakness in muscles and pain in both arms when palpating. The laboratory investigations showed no inflammation, and the
only abnormality in serological readings was elevated alkaline phosphatase—248 U/l (normal values, 40–150) due to its bone-specific fraction
comprising 80.5 % (Table 1). The radiology of the spine revealed compressive fracture in Th11–Th12, which was confirmed by the following
computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) readings as well. Bone mineral density was 0.840 g/cm2 indicating
osteopenia. Because of the family history, the patient underwent urological examination and ultrasound of the thyroid gland, liver, spleen
and prostate. His lung CT scan was inconspicuous with small atelectasis in lower segments. He was also referred to a haematologist and
endocrinologist, but after examination, both myeloma and parathyroid disease were excluded, although autoimmune thyroiditis due to raised
autoantibodies against thyroid tissue was diagnosed. No treatment except for painkillers was prescribed.Table 1The sequence of laboratory
findings from the beginning of disease20112012201320142015Sequence of analysis1st2nd1st2nd1st1st2nd(1 year after hip arthroplasty)Laboratory
findings Phosphate (0.87–1.45 mmol/l)0.480.520.361.19 24 h urine sample phosphate (12.9–42.0 mmol/24 h)26.4917.97%TPR = 90.52a Calcium
(2.15–2.50 mmol/l)2.252.372.422.402.48 Ionised calcium (1.05–1.30 mmol/l)1.121.161.301.09 Alkaline phosphatase
(40–150 U/l)248274310257.25297.7319.1927985.97 25-OH vitamin D (75–100 nmol/l)78.454.6847.9377.7085.8372.344.42 Parathyroid hormone
(1.6–7.2 pmol/l)6.078.1019.912.01 FGF-23 26–110 U/l589104 (measured 3 months after hip arthroplasty) a%TPR = 90.52—calculated according to
the formula: 100 × (1 − ((urine phosphate/urine creatinine) × (serum creatinine/serum phosphate))).
100 × (1 − ((45.06/28.521) × (0.07/1.17))) and was found to be in normal range between 85 and 95 %. Numbers are entered in millimoles per
liter The sequence of laboratory findings from the beginning of disease a%TPR = 90.52—calculated according to the formula:
100 × (1 − ((urine phosphate/urine creatinine) × (serum creatinine/serum phosphate))). 100 × (1 − ((45.06/28.521) × (0.07/1.17))) and was
found to be in normal range between 85 and 95 %. Numbers are entered in millimoles per liter With continuing weight and height loss together
with bone and muscle pain, the patient was hospitalised at the Department of Rheumatology for thorough examination in November 2011. The
alkaline phosphatase remained elevated and hypophosphatemia 0.48 mmol/l (normal values, 0.87–1.45) was documented for the first time. The
24-h urine sample phosphaturia showed normal phosphate clearance 26.5 mmol/24 h (normal values, 12.9–42.0 mmol/24 h) and subsequent
phosphate readings in urine were within normal values as well. Vitamin D levels, calcium and ionised calcium readings were found within the
normal values: vitamin D being 78.4 nmol/l (normal values, 75–100); calcium 2.25 mmol/l (normal values, 2.15–2.50); and ionised calcium
1.12 mmol/l (normal values, 1.05–1.30); nevertheless, he used periodically prescribed bone mineral supplements from the beginning of
disease. The radiology of spine showed a new compressive fracture in the level Th7–Th8 in addition to the old fracture, which was later
confirmed by CT scan. Whole body bone scintigraphy with 99mTc-MDP 550 MBq showed increased focal uptake of a radiotracer in the left
shoulder and in the ribs on both sides due to osteoblastic process and reduced uptake in right femoral on SPEC/CT sclerotic bone lesion
without tumour at that time or Morbus Paget specificity (Fig. 1). At that time, undifferentiated bone structural changes (M85.9) were
diagnosed because of compressive fractures in spine, increased bone specific fraction of alkaline phosphatase and no evidence found for
oncologic disease.Fig. 1 a Whole body bone scintigraphy 99mTc-MDP. Moderate uptake in the right shoulder, on both sides of the ribs due to
osteoblastic lesions. Reduces radiotracer uptake in right femoral head (long arrow). b 99mTc-MDP SPECT/CT of the pelvis. Reduced radiotracer
uptake in right femur head, corresponding sclerotic lesion on CT (long arrow) (year 2011) a Whole body bone scintigraphy 99mTc-MDP. Moderate
uptake in the right shoulder, on both sides of the ribs due to osteoblastic lesions. Reduces radiotracer uptake in right femoral head (long
arrow). b 99mTc-MDP SPECT/CT of the pelvis. Reduced radiotracer uptake in right femur head, corresponding sclerotic lesion on CT (long
arrow) (year 2011) In February 2012, the avascular necrosis of both femur heads with osteosclerotic locus in the right femur of unknown
origin was found by MRI. During routine follow-up in 2013, additional compressions were found in spine CT, now overtaking the segment from
T5 to T12. The bone density continued to diminish up to 0.76 g/cm2 in the hip and spine, and alkaline phosphatase readings remained
elevated. The antiosteoporotic treatment was started at that time with ac. zolendronicum (5 mg/100 ml) administered intravenously and
repeated after a year of interval but with no clinical or laboratory improvement. It was discontinued and switched to oral bisphosphonate.
Natrium risedronate was initially prescribed in dosage of 35 mg once per week and subsequently increased to 35 mg per day but was
discontinued in the fall 2014 because of no effect. During the time period of almost 4 years, the clinical condition continued to worsen
with a loss of height for 15 cm and weight for 20 kg from year 2011 now standing for 165 cm height and 53 kg weight (BMI = 23.1 kg/m2),
permanent pain in chest and hips, progressing breathing discomfort, muscular weakness, inability to bend below knees and posture change
(Fig. 2, photo taken in October 2014). Taking in account hypophosphatemia, elevated alkaline phosphatase from the beginning of disease,
compressive fractures and avascular necrosis in femur heads, the differential diagnosis was broadened to acquired Fanconi’s syndrome,
X-chromosome-linked hypophosphataemia and phosphaturic tumour-induced osteomalacia. To rule out Fanconi’s syndrome, the heavy metals
analysis for copper, lead, cadmium and mercury were ordered and were found to be in normal ranges: copper 15.7 μmol/l (n, 11–22), lead
9.60 μg/l (n, 0–90), cadmium 0.8 μg/l (n, 0–1.7) and mercury <1.0 μg/l (n, 0–5). Because of disease manifestation in adulthood, no analysis
for FGF gene mutation was requested. FGF-23 readings were found increased fivefold and being 589 U/l (normal values, 26–110 U/l). The whole
body scintigraphy with somatostatin analogues 99mTc-tekrotyd 605 MBq revealed intensive uptake of radiotracer in the right femoral head, and
SPECT/CT demonstrated uptake in sclerotic bone lesion in the right femoral head—tumour intensively expressing somatostatin receptors
(Fig. 3). For possible multicentre tumour localization, the whole body CT was ordered. CT indicated deformations in skeletal bones, ribbons,
thoracic vertebrae and pelvic bone due to osteomalacia or stress fractures, and no signs of healing were observed. CT also showed
compressive fractures in Th3–Th11 with pathologic kyphosis, stress fractures in both femoral heads and osteosclerotic tumour in right femur
head (Fig. 4). No deformations were found in soft tissues, parenchymal organs, lungs or lymph nodes.Fig. 2 a The posture before the right
hip endoprosthesis operation and tumour extirpation. The patient has given the written consent for his medical findings and photos to be
published. b 99mTc-Tektrotyd whole body scintigraphy. Intensive, focal radiotracer uptake in right femur head ( red markers around) (year
2014)Fig. 3 a 99mTc-Tektrotyd SPECT /CT of a pelvis. Focal, intensive radio tracer uptake in right femoral head (long arrow) and b
corresponding sclerotic lesion on CT (long arrow) (year 2014)Fig. 4Osteosclerotic tumour in the right femur head revealed during the whole
body computerised tomography (year 2014) a The posture before the right hip endoprosthesis operation and tumour extirpation. The patient has
given the written consent for his medical findings and photos to be published. b 99mTc-Tektrotyd whole body scintigraphy. Intensive, focal
radiotracer uptake in right femur head ( red markers around) (year 2014) a 99mTc-Tektrotyd SPECT /CT of a pelvis. Focal, intensive radio
tracer uptake in right femoral head (long arrow) and b corresponding sclerotic lesion on CT (long arrow) (year 2014) Osteosclerotic tumour
in the right femur head revealed during the whole body computerised tomography (year 2014) With strong prediction of phosphaturic
mesenchymal tumour-induced osteomalacia, a tumour-removal surgery was performed, and subsequently, removal of the head and the neck of the
right femur was required following total hip arthroplasty in October 2014. Surgical specimen was presented by femur proximal head.
Examination revealed ill-defined intramedullary grey tumour, approximately 2 cm in diameter. Bone tissue was soft, macroscopically intact by
tumour and showed a broad band of cartilage under articular surface. Histologic examination of the specimen revealed a hypercellular tumour
composed of spindle-shaped cells in fibromyxoid matrix, with a hemangiopericytoma-like pattern. Tumour cells had clear to eosinophilic
cytoplasm; nuclei were oval or elongated, of monomorphic appearance and with no signs of atypia. Mitotic figures were rare. Surrounding bone
trabeculae were irregular in size and shape with wide osteoid seams and foci of hyaline cartilage, showing enchondral ossification. The
tumour cells were strongly and diffusely positive with vimentin but exhibited no reactivity with PanCK, SMA, CD34, CD10 and D2-40
(Fig. 5).Fig. 5Histologic examination of the specimen revealed a hypercellular tumour composed of spindle-shaped cells in fibromyxoid
matrix, with a hemangiopericytoma-like pattern (a). Tumour cells had clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, nuclei were oval or elongated, of
monomorphic appearance, with no signs of atypia. Mitotic figures were rarely seen. Surrounding bone trabeculae were irregular in size and
shape with wide osteoid seams and foci of hyaline cartilage, showing enchondral ossification (b, c). The tumour cells were strongly and
diffusely positive with vimentin (d) but exhibited no reactivity with PanCK, SMA, CD34, CD10 and D2-40 (year 2014) Histologic examination of
the specimen revealed a hypercellular tumour composed of spindle-shaped cells in fibromyxoid matrix, with a hemangiopericytoma-like pattern
(a). Tumour cells had clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, nuclei were oval or elongated, of monomorphic appearance, with no signs of atypia.
Mitotic figures were rarely seen. Surrounding bone trabeculae were irregular in size and shape with wide osteoid seams and foci of hyaline
cartilage, showing enchondral ossification (b, c). The tumour cells were strongly and diffusely positive with vimentin (d) but exhibited no
reactivity with PanCK, SMA, CD34, CD10 and D2-40 (year 2014) The post operation period went without clinical complications and after
3 months the levels of phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase and FGF-23 were measured. Alkaline phosphatase remained elevated 316 IU/l (40–150)
with bone fraction now standing at 57.7 % and FGF-23 returned to normal values 104 IU/l (26–110 IU/l). Three months after surgical
procedure, the body pain almost disappeared and the weight increased up to 62 kg and height up to 166 cm (BMI = 22.5 kg/m2). The alkaline
phosphatase returned to normal values 6 months after tumour extirpation and remained within normal values after 1 year of follow-up
(Table 1). The phosphorus level increased remarkably up to 1.51 mmol/l (normal range, 0.87–1.45) after 3 months and normalised within
1 year. We have to admit that measuring 24-h urinary phosphate was not a proper phosphate balance measure throughout the disease course.
Without applying more sophisticated methods, e.g. percent tubular reabsorption of phosphate (%TRP) or tubular maximum for phosphate
corrected for glomerular filtration rate (TmP/GFR) as it is recommended , significant loss of phosphate was probably missed from the
beginning of disease. Conventional radiography of the spine after 1 year showed permanent and nonreversible spine deformation due to the old
compressions from Th3 to Th11 with no evidence of new compression fractures (Fig. 6).Fig. 6Conventional radiography of the spine after
1 year after tumour resection showed permanent and nonreversible spine deformation due to the old compressions from Th3 to Th11 with no
evidence of new compression fractures (year 2015) Conventional radiography of the spine after 1 year after tumour resection showed permanent
and nonreversible spine deformation due to the old compressions from Th3 to Th11 with no evidence of new compression fractures (year 2015)
The diagnosis of TIO is a challenge under the best of circumstances. TIO should be included in the differential diagnosis in patients with
progressive weakness, bone and muscle pain and multiple fractures. The diagnosis is commonly delayed for years due to the nonspecific nature
of the presenting symptoms, failure to include determination of serum phosphorus levels in blood chemistry testing and difficulty in
identifying the responsible tumour. The professional evaluation of whole body images, including single-photon emission tomography enables
identification and better tumour contrast which can be found in skeletal structures of whatever region of the human body. FGF23 may be of
help to understand the underlying mechanisms of TIO and a measurement to follow up the disease course. This review includes the description
of one case report, and the consent form for publication was obtained from the person. The consent form of that particular person was sent
to the Editor of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions All
authors contributed equally within the limits and beyond their speciality in accumulating knowledge, diagnosing and managing this rare
condition and have approved the manuscript. JD was involved in the disease management and follow-up of the patient. MM contributed to the
patient management and had substantial involvement into the pathogenetical considerations of the biochemical mechanisms of the disease. DM
was involved in the thorough literature review of tumour-induced osteomalacia. DV was involved in the radiological investigations throughout
the follow-up. DS was involved in the histological evaluation of the tumour and proceeding of non-routine specimens. PB was involved in the
surgical management and follow-up of the patient. TK revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual content and gave final
approval for this manuscript version to be submitted. We thank Prof. A. Venalis and Dr. D. Povilenaite for their intellectual input, support
and conceptualization of this review.
