Isolated adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) deficiency is a pituitary disorder characterized by reduction only in the secretion of ACTH.
Although the underlying mechanism remains to be elucidated, numbers of cases with this entity have been increasing. We experienced a case
presenting with gait disturbance necessitating differential diagnosis from idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH). A 69-year-old
female with a complaint of difficulty walking and suspected to have iNPH at a prior hospital was referred to our department. For the prior
three years, she had suffered from a progressive gait disturbance. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed global ventricular dilatation.
The typical features of the gait in iNPH cases were all identifiable. Neuropsychological dementia scale tests showed deterioration. However,
the major feature of a disproportionately enlarged subarachnoid-space on MRI was not obvious. The patient developed progressively worsening
fatigue during hospitalization. Her symptoms resembled those of hypothalamic-pituitary tumor patients. Serum ACTH and cortisol levels were
low. While corticotrophin releasing hormone stress tests showed no response, other stress tests using thyrotropin releasing hormone,
luteinizing hormone releasing hormone, and growth hormone releasing hormone yielded normal responses, indicating a diagnosis of isolated
ACTH deficiency. We initiated corticosteroid therapy, and her gait disturbance improved promptly. Isolated ACTH deficiency may have major
significance to the differential diagnosis of iNPH. Early consideration of this entity is anticipated to facilitate making an early
diagnosis. Isolated adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) deficiency causes adrenal insufficiency as a result of impaired secretion of ACTH but
no other anterior pituitary gland hormones. ACTH secretory cell damage, resulting from neurohypophysitis and an autoimmune mechanism, has
been implicated in the etiology of this disorder . Definitive diagnosis is relatively simple using serum ACTH measurement and pituitary
stimulation tests , however, early diagnosis is not always easy because symptoms of adrenal insufficiency such as hypoglycemia and
depressive state are nonspecific, and can be misdiagnosed as mental disorders . The number of reports regarding isolated ATCH deficiency has
increased along with the popularization of ACTH measurement, and in the field of cerebral/ neurological medical treatment, this disorder
should be kept in mind when making a differential diagnosis. We experienced a case of isolated ATCH deficiency presenting with gradually
progressive gait disturbance that needed to be distinguished from other forms of idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH). We
describe this case herein, with a review of the relevant literature. The patient was a 65-year-old woman who had undergone surgery at
19 years of age for appendicitis. Her medical history was otherwise unremarkable. Starting 3 years prior to the current presentation, the
patient had gradually developed a gait disturbance, for which she consulted a local orthopedic surgery department, and upon diagnosis of
knee osteoarthrosis received conservative therapy. At approximately 1 week before admissions, she had begun to experience loss of appetite
and vomiting, and consulted a local physician. On suspicion of gastrointestinal disease, a thorough examination of the gastrointestinal
tract was performed, but no organic disease was identified. Although the loss of appetite and vomiting resolved spontaneously, the gait
disturbance gradually worsened, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head revealed ventricular enlargement. The patient was thus
referred to our department for suspected iNPH related to the gait disturbance. Her height of 148.3 cm, weight of 54.4 kg, and body mass
index of 24.8 were all within standard ranges. There was no medical history that could have led to secondary hydrocephalus. There were no
abnormalities in vital signs with body temperature 36 °C, blood pressure 110/63 mm/Hg, and heart rate 83 beats per minute. Although the
patient’s consciousness was clear, 15 on the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), and there was no muscle weakness, she walked with her legs apart in
short quick steps, and required a walking aid. While muscle tonus was normal, the patient complained of mild pain when extending the knee.
As to higher order brain functions, mini mental state examination (MMSE) results were 24/30, and the frontal assessment battery (FAB)
results were 9/18. Blood test findings at the time of admission were within normal range apart from mild hypoalbuminemia (total protein
4.6 g/dL, albumin 2.7 g/dL, total cholesterol 147 mg/dL, and LDL cholesterol 100 mg/dL), and elevated thyroid free T3 (TSH 4.333 μIU/mL,
free T3 3.78 pg/mL, free T4 1.16 ng/dL). There were no blood-sugar or electrolyte (Na 140 mmol/L, Cl 106 mmol/, K 4.1 mmol/L, serum glucose
73 mg/dL) abnormalities. Head MRI revealed enlargement of all cerebral ventricles, with an Evan’s index of 0.4, and the Sylvian fissure
appeared wide open consistent with iNPH. However, the specific feature of narrowing of the sulci at the high convexity area was not obvious
(Fig. 1). Single-photon emission computed tomography revealed reduced cerebral blood flow (CBF) surrounding the Sylvian fissure, with
relatively increased CBF in the convexity, which was consistent with the pattern for iNPH (Fig. 2). Findings for the sulci at the high
convexity area were inconsistent with typical iNPH, however, and we thus reconsidered the possibility of other diseases that may have caused
the gait disturbance.Fig. 1Upper: T2-weighted axial MRI revealed enlarged ventricles. Lower: In T2-weighted coronal MRI also showed enlarged
ventricles, however, the major feature of disproportionately enlarged subarachnoid-space was not obviousFig. 2Single-photon emission
computed tomography revealed areas of relatively decreased blood perfusion around the Sylvian fissure, while increased blood perfusion in
the external layer around the convexity side Upper: T2-weighted axial MRI revealed enlarged ventricles. Lower: In T2-weighted coronal MRI
also showed enlarged ventricles, however, the major feature of disproportionately enlarged subarachnoid-space was not obvious Single-photon
emission computed tomography revealed areas of relatively decreased blood perfusion around the Sylvian fissure, while increased blood
perfusion in the external layer around the convexity side Detailed tests were ultimately performed after hospital admission including a
spinal tap. Following admission, the patient gradually became less active, and tended to stay in bed. Re-examination revealed blood sugar
levels of 40 mg/dL and systolic blood pressure of 90 mm/Hg. On suspicion of impaired anterior pituitary function, scans were performed of
the pituitary in the diencephalon, and baseline pituitary hormone levels were verified. The spinal tap results were negative. On MRI,
pituitary gland was normal measuring 12 mm in maximum diameter with no enlargement or deviation of stalk, and there were no neoplastic
lesions, inflammatory lesions in the pituitary area of the diencephalon, or changes suggesting that surgery had been performed in all
sequences including contrast-enhanced dynamic images (Fig. 3). Table 1 presents baseline hormone levels, and Table 2 the results of the
anterior pituitary gland hormone loading test using corticotrophin releasing hormone, thyrotropin releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone
releasing hormone, and growth hormone releasing hormone. Pituitary hormone results included ACTH <1.0 pg/ml (normal range: 7.2–63.3), and
cortisol levels <1.0 μ/dL (normal range: 4.0–18.3), indicating pituitary adrenal insufficiency. There were no decreases in other hormone
levels, with relatively mild elevations of growth hormone, prolactin and free T3 levels. We checked carefully again the medical history of
the patient, but there were no recent history of exogenous glucocorticoid treatment. An additional pituitary stimulation test was performed,
in which ACTH and cortisol responses only were found to have disappeared, and isolated ACTH deficiency was thus diagnosed (Fig. 4). After
initiation of hydrocortisone supplements, her gait quickly improved. While observing the clinical symptoms, hydrocortisone (Cortril ®) was
adjusted to a daily dose of 15 mg, and after instructing the patient as to how to respond on sick days, she was discharged to return home.
At approximately 6 months after discharge, although the ventricular enlargement on MRI was same as before, the patient scored 27/30 points
on the MMSE and 15/18 points on the FAB.Fig. 3MRI showed normal pituitary gland measuring 12 mm in maximum diameter with no deviation of
stalk, and there is no tumor or inflammatory lesion around the hypothalamic-pituitary area. (Upper left: T1 coronal MRI, Upper right: T1
gadolinium coronal MRI, Upper right: T1 gadolinium sagittal MRI, lower left: T1 gadolinium sagittal MRI)Table 1Endocrinogical findings about
basal level of anterior pituitary hormoneTSH4.333μIU/mL (0.350–4.940)freeT33.78 pg/mL (1.71–3.71)freeT41.16 ng/dL (0.70–1.48)GH1.85 ng/mL
(0.28–1.64)IGF-140 ng/mL (57–175)LH17.19 mIU/mL (5.72–64.31)FSH48.20 mIU/mL (<157.79)PRL34.61 ng/mL (4.91–29.32)ACTH<1.0 pg/mL
(7.2–63.3)Cortisol≤1.0 μg/dL (4.0–18.3) TSH thyroid stimulating hormone, IGF insulin-like growth factor, LH luteinizing hormone, FSH
follicle stimulating hormone, PRL prolactin(): Normal range of each testTable 2Endocrinogical findings about pituitary function test using
CRH, TRH, LHRH and GRHTime(min)LH (mIU/mL)FSH (mIU/mL)GH (ng/mL)TSH (μIU/mL)ACTH (pg/mL)Cortisol (μg/dL)PRL
(ng/mL)01758.354.771.563<1.0≤1.023.793064.7279.9832.914.168<1.0≤1.0154.76077.7288.884511.643<1.0≤1.01089076.4100.6721.19.143<1.0≤1.082.13
CRH corticotropin-releasing hormone, TRH thyrotropin-releasing hormone, LHRH luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone, GRH growth hormone
releasing hormoneFig. 4Pituitary stimulation test using corticotropin-releasing hormone, thyrotropin-releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone-
releasing hormone and growth hormone releasing hormone showed no response in plasma cortisol level and ACTH level, while other hormones
showed adequate response MRI showed normal pituitary gland measuring 12 mm in maximum diameter with no deviation of stalk, and there is no
tumor or inflammatory lesion around the hypothalamic-pituitary area. (Upper left: T1 coronal MRI, Upper right: T1 gadolinium coronal MRI,
Upper right: T1 gadolinium sagittal MRI, lower left: T1 gadolinium sagittal MRI) Endocrinogical findings about basal level of anterior
pituitary hormone TSH thyroid stimulating hormone, IGF insulin-like growth factor, LH luteinizing hormone, FSH follicle stimulating hormone,
PRL prolactin (): Normal range of each test Endocrinogical findings about pituitary function test using CRH, TRH, LHRH and GRH CRH
corticotropin-releasing hormone, TRH thyrotropin-releasing hormone, LHRH luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone, GRH growth hormone releasing
hormone Pituitary stimulation test using corticotropin-releasing hormone, thyrotropin-releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone and growth hormone releasing hormone showed no response in plasma cortisol level and ACTH level, while other hormones showed
adequate response Isolated ACTH deficiency is caused by damage to the ACTH-producing cells of the pituitary gland and can lead to secondary
adrenocortical insufficiency. In 1954, Steinberg and colleagues were the first to report a patient presenting with general fatigue, weight
loss, and hypoglycemia which improved after ACTH administration and their case was described as having true pituitary Addison’s disease .
This disorder has been called isolated ACTH deficiency. With the development and popularization of endocrine tests, the number of such
reports has increasing in number. The mean age at disease onset of patients withisolated ACTH deficiency is 50 years and the male to female
is 1.2–3.6: 1, with the disease being slightly more common in men. In some instances, isolated ACTH deficiency is concurrent with primary
hypothyroidism and Hashimoto’s disease. Furthermore, some cases may also be positive for anti-thyroglobulin antibodies and anti-pituitary
antibodies , which implies the involvement of an autoimmune mechanism, though the details remain unclear. There have also been a few reports
of cases associated with lymphocytic neurohypophysitis . Other reported cases have presented with general fatigue, weight loss, and
hyponatremia along with loss of olfaction following head trauma . Isolated ACTH deficiency primarily presents with symptoms of adrenal
insufficiency due to lack of ACTH secretion, along with general fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting and skin dryness. However, when
patients have psychological symptoms such as apathy and depression in addition to the above, the condition can be mistakenly diagnosed as a
mental disorder. Thus, diagnosis on the basis of clinical symptoms is not necessarily easy . Our case had symptoms resembling those
experienced by patients with pituitary gland lesions of the diencephalon, which allowed us to make an early diagnosis. In the presence of
isolated ACTH deficiency, if low serum ACTH levels are confirmed, then a pituitary stimulation test will specifically exhibit the
disappearance of ACTH only. Serum ACTH levels are usually below the sensitivity threshold of 5.0 pg/ml, though this may vary among reported
cases. It is assumed that reported cases with ACTH deficiency also include patients with limited ACTH reserves, i.e. partially impaired ACTH
secretion, which would be regarded as ACTH deficiency syndrome based on reports classifying disease severity . Reported cases presenting
with neurological symptoms of ACTH deficiency, excluding those in adrenal crisis with induced disturbance of consciousness and psychological
symptoms, are relatively rare. There are reported cases presenting with elevated creatinine kinase and predominant proximal muscle weakness
that required differential diagnosis from neuromuscular diseases, and that 2 years elapsed between the initial examination, prompted by
serum ACTH levels measured incidentally, and definitive diagnosis . The improvements of gait disturbance and cognitive dysfunction in this
case are not interpreted in detail. It can be inferred that the replacement therapy cause any metabolic or circulating change as
morphological change had not seem in this case. There are case reports describing isolated ACTH deficiency associated with dementia, in
which CBF increased on positron emission tomography following hormone replacement therapy, while at the same time cognitive function
improved . Treatment for isolated ACTH deficiency involves replacement therapy, and as with more common forms of hypoadrenocorticism, a
fixed amount of cortisol, a physiological glucocorticoid, is generally provided as a supplement. As with other adrenal insufficiency
replacement therapies, it is vital to instruct patients that the medication dose should be increased at times of stress such as fever and
infection. The symptoms of isolated ACTH deficiency are non-specific, and diagnosis can be challenging. Cases have been reported in which
diagnosis, including differential diagnosis from mental disorders, was difficult. In individuals age 60 years and older, iNPH presents with
a triad of symptoms, i.e. gait disturbance, dementia, and urinary incontinence. Gait disturbance, which is a major cause of reduced
activities of daily living, can be improved by shunt implantation and is a rare type of treatable dementia. However, gait disturbance and
dementia are not limited to iNPH, instead being common in elderly individuals. Furthermore, iNPH is a disease in which caution is essential
when differentiating the imaging findings occasionally seen in elderly individuals, such as ventricular enlargement due to atrophy of the
cerebrum and cerebrovascular changes that develop with aging. In the iNPH treatment guidelines, ventricular enlargement is defined by an
Evan’s index of 0.3 or above, and although this is one criterion required to make the diagnosis of this disorder, an Evan’s index greater
than 0.3 is seen in 3–4 % of healthy elderly individuals, and thus cannot be called a specific finding . Characteristic findings of iNPH
include a wide-open Sylvian fissure and narrowing of the sulci at the high convexity. In the present case, although iNPH was suspected on
the basis of ventricular enlargement, no narrowing of the sulci was observed at the high convexity area. When the typical diagnostic
findings of iNPH are not present, it is vital to keep isolated ACTH deficiency in mind when performing the differential diagnosis. Isolated
ATCH deficiency can cause a variety of clinical symptoms. Hormone replacement therapy improves symptoms, and early diagnosis is closely
related to patient prognosis. In patients suspected of having iNPH with an atypical clinical presentation and imaging findings, isolated
ACTH deficiency should be considered early. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. This case report includes
human date. cerebral blood flow frontal assessment battery Glasgow coma scale idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus mini mental state
examination magnetic resonance imaging Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
YG and KT treated the patient and drafted the article. YF and KO did the spinal tap test. TK and KI did the pituitary stimulation test. KM
and HS analyzed the data and critically revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank Dr Kei Yamada
(MD, PhD, Department of Radiology, Kyoto Prefectural University Graduate School of Medicine) for supply the MR images.
