Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 22 Final Diagnosis: Lemierre’s syndrome Symptoms: Dyspnea • chest pain •
swelling Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Thoracentesis Specialty: Infectious Diseases Rare co-existance of disease or pathology Lemierre’s
syndrome (LS) is a rare syndrome caused by an acute oropharyngeal infection with metastatic spreading. It was described in 1939 as jugular
vein septic thrombophlebitis associated with retropharyngeal infection. Different organisms can cause LS, such as Fusobacterium species,
Peptostreptococcus, group B and C, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and Enterococcus species, but the most commonly isolated pathogen is
Fusobacterium necrophorum, a common oral flora. Management depends on the initial presentation, type of pathogen isolated, and proper
selection of antibiotics. We report a case of a 22-year-old man with no past medical history, who presented with left jaw pain and
progressive left facial area swelling associated with dyspnea. A final diagnosis of LS was made based on criteria of computed tomography
(CT) of the neck and the clinical symptoms. The patient was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics. Subsequent imaging of the chest showed
pleural effusion with septic emboli. He underwent thoracentesis and chest tube placement. Final blood cultures were remarkable for gram-
negative rods – Prevotella anaerobes – which supported the diagnosis of LS. His condition improved, including the dyspnea, and he was
discharged on the proper antibiotics coverage with outpatient follow-up. LS is a rare condition associated with metastatic infection
spreading. This syndrome can be associated with further complications, such as pleural effusions and/or empyemas. Early recognition is
important to prevent fatal complications and provide adequate antibiotics coverage. We report only the third case in the medical literature
of Prevotella-induced LS with a secondary complication of pleural effusion. Jugular vein septic thrombophlebitis, also known as LS, is an
extremely rare complication that stems most commonly from an acute oropharyngeal infection with retropharyngeal extension and metastatic
spread. The condition was first described in 1936 by Andre Lemierre in a 20-patient case series in which he reported similarly grouped oral,
gastroenterological, and genitourinary flora that proliferated and disseminated, causing septic embolic phenomena . The incidence of this
condition is approximately 0.8 persons per million per year, with an estimated mortality rate of up to 24% . Previously, this syndrome had a
mortality rate of 32–90% in the pre-antibiotic era, but the incidence and mortality have since diminished with increased use of antibiotics
. The most commonly isolated pathogen is Fusobacterium necrophorum, a common oral flora. The remaining pathogens include Fusobacterium
species, Peptostreptococcus, Group B and C. Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and Enterococcus species . A 22-year-old man with no significant
past medical history presented to the emergency department with a 1-week history of left jaw pain with progressive swelling of the left
facial area and dyspnea. He was previously evaluated in an urgent care clinic and was given antibiotics, without improvement. Other
associated symptoms were left-sided pleuritic chest pain and subjective fever, and chills with malaise. His social history was unremarkable.
The physical examination showed normal vital signs, gingival bleeding, lymphadenopathy, and chest tenderness to palpation on left 6 and 7
ribs. There was also increased tactile vocal fremitus and decreased breath sounds on the left side of the chest. Initial laboratory findings
are illustrated in Table 1. The chest x-ray showed left lower lobe consolidation with small pleural effusion (Figure 1). A diagnosis of
odontogenic infectious process was initially made, with possible disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). On further evaluation, a
peripheral blood smear was negative for schistocytes, and other laboratory findings were unremarkable for DIC picture. Given the physical
findings, a CT neck was done, which was remarkable for thrombosis of left external jugular veins and pterygoid venous plexus extending into
the internal jugular veins, with left submandibular lymphadenopathy (Figure 2). No evidence of fluid collection was noted, ruling out the
possibility of an abscess. Additionally, a CT chest was obtained to further evaluate the left consolidation noted on the x-ray. It was
remarkable for large left pleural effusion with pleural thickening and multiple pulmonary nodules in both lungs, with some cavitation
representing possible septic emboli (Figure 3). The clinical presentation and imaging data led to the diagnosis of LS. Initially, the
patient was started on ampicillin-sulbactam and received platelets transfusion for low platelets. Once stabilized, he underwent
thoracentesis for left pleural effusion, which was revealed to be an exudate process, as illustrated in Table 2. A pigtail catheter was
placed to drain the pleural effusion. Blood cultures came back positive for Prevotella anaerobes. The patient was then treated with
intravenous cefepime 2 gram every 24 hours and oral clindamycin 450 mg every 6 hours for 2 weeks and 5 days, respectively. He remained
afebrile, with negative follow-up blood cultures and was discharged with outpatient care. Since Andre Lemierre first published his case
series in 1936, there have been less than 160 published cases of LS, with almost one-third documented after 1988 . LS is a rare complication
characterized by thrombosis of the internal jugular vein and isolation of anaerobic pathogens from either the blood or an abscess . In many
cases the patients also develop a septic-like clinical picture with frequent pulmonary involvement . Gupta et al. presented an interesting
case of LS induced by Streptococcus intermedius secondary to gingival scraping . Our patient presented with Prevotella- induced jugular vein
thrombosis. In an extensive review of the literature, only 2 other similar cases have been reported . Among the vast majority of the normal
oral anaerobic bacteria, Prevotella and Fusobacterium are important source of infection. Mosca et al. assessed the antimicrobial profile of
55 cases of periodontal gram-negative bacteremia. The study showed 39 strains of Prevotella and 16 strains of Fusobacterium. Furthermore,
most of the Prevotella stains were susceptible to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, metronidazole, and doxycycline . A prospective observational
study was done in Athens, Greece to determine the epidemiology and microbiological features of various anaerobes. It was noted that
Bacteroids were isolated from intra-abdominal, whereas Prevotella was isolated from respiratory tract . Although the pathogenesis of
Fusobacterium is complex, it has been speculated that its leukotoxin and endotoxin, as well as its ability to aggregate platelets, are the
primary virulence factors in establishing and overcoming host defenses . These virulence factors, along with the septic pro-coagulant
cascade, have been attributed to its ability to develop associated septic thrombi. Deficiencies in host factors, such as thrombophilias,
increase the likelihood of septic spread . However, at this time there are no studies specifically looking at specific virulence factors of
Prevotella regarding thrombus formation. We surmise that both anaerobic species may have similar and overlapping factors, which would
explain its continued virulence . Most patients with LS present with a pharyngitis-like picture with associated fever, chills, rigors,
dysphagia, neck discomfort, and malaise . Other pulmonary symptoms such as dyspnea, cough, pleuritic-pain, and hemoptysis have been reported
. A high clinical suspicion for LS should exist when patients have continued pharyngitis symptoms after a standard course of antibiotics or
when a pharyngitis-like illness is associated with pulmonary symptoms . Chest radiographs may demonstrate non-specific opacities in the
event of pulmonary involvement, with up to 15% of cases developing empyemas. Depending on the clinical presentation, an ultrasound of the
neck or CT of the head and neck will demonstrate a unilateral internal jugular vein thrombus in up to 70% of cases . Concomitant positive
blood or oropharyngeal abscess cultures increase the likelihood of the diagnosis. Management of LS should include possible surgical drainage
of an abscess or fluid collection if found. Secondary complications such as empyemas or pneumothoraxes should be managed by chest tube
placement . Although it is an uncommon complication, esophageal perforation can occur secondary to misplacement of a nasogastric tube (NGT).
Most misplacements are intracranial or endotracheal . NGT placements are commonly used in hospitals to deliver nutrition. Early detection
and surgical intervention reduces morbidity and mortality. Unlike our case, the patient had no indications for NGT. Empiric therapy with a
third-generation B-lactamase inhibitor such as ceftriaxone plus anaerobic coverage with metronidazole would provide sufficient initial
coverage. Duration of therapy is generally 4–6 weeks of intravenous antibiotics to allow for penetration into fibrin clots . There is
insufficient evidence to support the use of anticoagulation in septic thrombi except in cases of thrombi that persist despite aggressive
medical therapy . LS is a rare complication of bacterial oropharyngeal infection seen mostly in young healthy individuals with metastatic
spreading. The diagnosis largely depends on patient history, signs, and symptoms. Imaging studies such as CT scan can display the thrombus
or filling defect in the internal jugular vein. Some of the complications seen in LS are septic emboli, pleural effusion, and DIC. A high
level of suspicion should be raised by other less common organisms to prevent deterioration of the condition if not covered by adequate
antibiotics. Left lobe consolidation with small pleural effusion. CT of the head and neck showing thrombosis of the left pterygoid venous
plexus leading to internal jugular vein filling defect. CT chest showing large pleural effusion on left representing empyema. Multiple
pulmonary nodules showing cavitation are probably septic emboli. Initial laboratories. Pleural fluid analysis.
