Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 29 Final Diagnosis: Paroxysmal atrial fibrillation • cold-stimulus headache
Symptoms: Palpitations • headache Medication: Diltiazem • Ibutilide Clinical Procedure: None Specialty: Emergency Medicine • Internal
Medicine Unknown ethiology • Rare disease Episodes of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation may be precipitated by the rapid ingestion of ice-cold
foods and beverages. This condition has received little research attention, and its true prevalence is poorly described. Treating physicians
may not identify cold ingestion as a causal factor of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, thus compromising both history taking and patient
education. We report a case of a healthy young-adult man who drank a slushed ice beverage that immediately induced atrial fibrillation and a
brain freeze headache simultaneously. This occurred on two separate occasions, years apart. During both episodes, the acute brain freeze
self-resolved quickly, but the new-onset palpitations occasioned a visit to the emergency department for diagnosis and treatment. The
emergency physicians failed to make the causal link between the cold drink and the atrial dysrhythmia. Though the brain freeze headache and
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation were both precipitated by rapid ingestion of an ice-cold beverage, the mediating mechanisms are distinct. We
review these two cold-induced conditions, their prevalence, and their probable mechanisms. The recurrent simultaneous occurrence of brain-
freeze headache with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation identifies the ingestion of a frozen beverage as the precipitant of the atrial
dysrhythmia. Increasing physician awareness of cold ingestion as a cause of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation will improve history taking and
patient education. It is well-known that cold stimulation to the palate can cause a temporary brain freeze headache . Induction of atrial
fibrillation (AF) by a cold drink, however, has been only rarely reported, but may be significantly more prevalent than the case literature
would suggest . The simultaneous co-occurrence of brain freeze headache with paroxysmal AF, both triggered by the same cold ingestion, has
not been previously reported. A healthy 29-year-old man presented to the emergency department (ED) one evening complaining of sudden-onset
irregular palpitations one hour prior to arrival. The symptoms began just as he started ingesting a commercial slushed ice drink. Co-
incident with the palpitations, he developed a brain freeze headache. Review of systems was negative for chest pain, dyspnea, and pre-
syncope. He took no medications and customarily ingested two cups of coffee every morning, as he had on the day of presentation. Past
medical history was negative for any structural cardiac or neurological conditions. He reported several prior episodes of short, self-
resolving palpitations. Only once in the past had he sought medical attention for these and was found to be in AF, which was successfully
cardioverted in the ED with 1 mg of intravenous ibutilide. By the time he arrived at the ED his headache had resolved, but the palpitations
persisted. His blood pressure was 166/70 mmHg, heart rate was 136 beats/min, respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min, and his oxygen saturation
was 99%. Other than an irregularly irregular rhythm, his physical examination was normal. The patient was placed on a cardiac monitor, pulse
oximeter, and oxygen by nasal cannula at 2 liters per minute. A peripheral IV line was placed, and a 12-lead electrocardiogram was obtained,
which revealed AF with a rapid ventricular response and normal intervals. Laboratory studies, including a complete blood count, renal
function, serum electrolytes, and cardiac biomarkers, were all normal. Diltiazem, 10 mg, was administered intravenously and reduced his
rapid ventricular response to less than 110 beats/min. Because he was young without structural heart disease with AF onset <48 hours prior
to presentation, and moderately symptomatic AF, cardioversion was pursued. Cardiology was consulted and ibutilide was chosen because it had
been effective in the past. The emergency physician discussed the treatment options with the patient and he agreed with the treatment plan.
Two doses of 1 mg ibutilide were administered, each infused over 10 minutes, and separated by a 15-minute interval. Fifty-six minutes after
the start of the first dose, the patient converted to a normal sinus rhythm with complete resolution of his symptoms. He was monitored in
the ED for a total of four hours without complications. He was discharged home with instructions to avoid caffeine and follow-up with his
primary care provider. As an outpatient, he subsequently underwent a transthoracic echocardiogram, a stress test, and Holter monitoring, all
of which were normal. Interestingly, several years later the patient returned to the ED with the identical complex of symptoms, again
precipitated by a slushy ice drink. He was again treated with intravenous ibutilide and was referred to cardiology for follow-up. This case
illustrates that ingesting a slushy ice drink can cause the simultaneous occurrence of two different medical conditions. Deglutition of a
cold drink has been widely reported as a precipitant of brain-freeze or ice-cream headache, formally termed cold-induced or cold-stimulus
headache. It is described by the International Headache Society as a rapid-onset, short-lasting frontal or temporal pain induced by passage
of cold material over the palate and/or posterior pharyngeal wall . Brain freeze headache develops within seconds of exposure and resolves
within minutes after the removal of the cold stimulus . Cold-induced headache is a common phenomenon among susceptible individuals, and may
be more prevalent among migraneurs . In a large survey study in Taiwan, 40% of adolescents reported having experienced brain-freeze headache
at some point in their life . Randomized controlled studies have demonstrated that the time course of ingestion matters: rapid or prolonged
consumption of a cold beverage or ice cream increases the likelihood of developing a brain-freeze headache . Although the pathogenic
mechanism of cold-stimulus headache is not fully understood, it appears to be a neurovascular event mediated by the trigeminal nerve. Using
transcranial Doppler, investigators have recently demonstrated a sudden, dramatic increase in cerebral blood flow through the anterior
cerebral artery associated with the sensation of brain-freeze . Applying warm water to the palate reversed the cold-induced vasodilation and
resolved the headache. Co-incident with the patient’s brain freeze headache was the development of paroxysmal AF, both caused by the same
ice-cold drink. AF triggered by the ingestion of cold food or beverage was first reported in the literature in 1994 . Swallowing in general
was described as a cause of paroxysmal AF decades earlier , but the proposal that gastrointestinal maladies can trigger cardiac dysrhythmias
dates back to the 1930s . Few reports of AF caused by cold-substance ingestion have been published ; more has been written on the broader
diagnostic category of swallowing-induced AF . As the esophagus descends it closely abuts the left atrium and the vagal ganglia, implicated
in the genesis of AF. This anatomic proximity allows events in the esophagus to directly influence cardiac rhythms, as may be the case in
the triggering of AF by gastroesophageal reflux disease . Although cold material in the esophagus may directly affect the left atrium
through the wall of the esophagus, the causal connection may be more indirect, through more circuitous autonomic pathways. The autonomic
nervous system is known to be important in the genesis and maintenance of AF . Using an autonomic taxonomy, precipitants can be categorized
as adrenergic, vagal, or random . AF is deemed adrenergic when characteristically precipitated by physical exercise or extreme emotion, and
is considered vagal when developing during sleep, upon coughing, burping, or swallowing, or, in our case, with the ingestion of very cold
food or beverage . Some studies have found an association between the trigger type and success of various treatments, but the nature of the
association is still being studied . Although swallowing is usually categorized as a vagal trigger, adrenergic reflexes may nevertheless
sometimes be at play. Here, adrenergic reflexes in the upper and mid esophagus directly alter atrial depolarization, causing asynchronous
recovery time, resulting in atrial tachyarrhythmias, including AF . Tachyarrhythmias can be precipitated by swallowing , but swallowing-
induced arrhythmias are more commonly bradycardic, given the predominant role of the vagus nerve . Upon ingestion of cold substances, in
particular, neural pathways are triggered by receptors in the pharynx and esophagus that activate the cardioinhibitory center in the
medulla. The medulla then delivers a signal via the vagus nerve to the pulmonary vein region of the left atrium, reducing the relative
refractory periods of the myocytes in a nonuniform manner, increasing heterogeneity, and augmenting the ability of single atrial premature
beats to initiate AF in susceptible individuals . This vagally-mediated mechanism of cold-induced AF is thought to be more common in younger
patients and those with structurally normal hearts . The vagal stimulus need only be brief, just sufficiently long to initiate the AF, but
not strong enough or sustained enough to dampen the rapid ventricular response. Our patient illustrates this pattern, as the cold-mediated
vagal reflex triggered AF, but did not curtail the ensuing tachycardia. If the vagal drive is exaggerated, patients with cold-induced AF may
present without tachycardia . Ibutilide is known to be an effective cardioversion agent in patients with vagally-mediated AF, as it was in
our case, perhaps through the inhibition of the muscarinic potassium current . The prevalence of cold-swallow-induced AF is not known. Many
cases may be self-resolving and thus are not brought to medical attention. We are currently undertaking a retrospective study of ED patients
across 21 medical centers in California over seven years who received intravenous ibutilide, procainamide, or amiodarone for the
cardioversion of AF or flutter (the Pharm CAFÉ Study). One of the variables we are identifying in a systematic fashion from the electronic
health record is the suspected precipitant of the atrial dysrhythmia. An interim analysis of our first 414 cases identified five cases
(1.2%) of cold-drink-induced AF, higher than we would have thought if this were a very rare phenomenon. Unlike our case report above, none
of these patients complained of co-incident brain freeze attending the onset of their dysrhythmia symptoms. We suspect that the true number
of cases of cold-induced AF is under-reported in the ED since patients might not make the causal connection between the temperature of their
food or beverage and the onset of rhythm-related symptoms. Even if patients were to report to their emergency physicians that cold ingestion
was the probable AF precipitant, this fact may go under-documented in the health record since emergency physicians might not believe the
association or think it relevant. One prospective study asked 100 randomly selected patients presenting for hospital care for idiopathic
paroxysmal AF to identify their dysrhythmogenic precipitant . The investigators found that 8% of their cohort reported cold beverage
ingestion to be their AF trigger. Others studies have found similar rates . Combined with our preliminary study results, these data suggest
that the prevalence of cold-induced AF may be higher than suspected. Interestingly, the emergency physician in our case documented that the
AF developed at the time of the rapid ingestion of the icy drink, but failed to caution the patient at the time of discharge to avoid
further exposure. Rather, the physician advised, not against cold drinks, but against coffee, although this was not the precipitant of the
patient’s headache or dysrhythmia. Though it might be prudent for a patient with paroxysmal AF to limit caffeine ingestion, the relationship
between coffee ingestion and incident AF has been called into question by a number of studies . Just as in our case report, none of the five
emergency physicians caring for the patients with cold-induced AF from our Pharm CAFÉ Study reported advising their patients to avoid re-
exposure to ice-cold drinks. Instead, they all recommended a reduction in caffeine intake. This case report illustrates that rapid ingestion
of cold beverages can have serious medical implications. In our case, a slushy ice drink induced the simultaneous development of brain
freeze headache and paroxysmal AF. Although cold-stimulus headache subsides quickly after the removal of the inciting substance, paroxysmal
AF can be longer lasting, sometimes requiring medical intervention. Unless the treating physician is aware of the association between cold
ingestion and paroxysmal AF, the patient may not be given the best avoidance advice on discharge. Ongoing research may help us better
understand the prevalence of cold-induced AF in patients seeking medical care. We are grateful to Taylor I. Liu, MD, PhD, cardiac
electrophysiologist, Kaiser Permanente Santa Clara Medical Center, for his constructive criticism of an early draft of this report.
