Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is an unusual condition typified by acute visual impairment caused by sudden, marked
parieto-occipital vasogenic edema. Thought to be inflammatory in origin, it has been described in patients undergoing chemotherapy, with
autoimmune disease, and in some infections. We report a case of PRES that occurred one week after an episode of acute pancreatitis in an
otherwise healthy 40-year-old female. There was progressive visual impairment over a 24-hour period with almost complete visual loss, with
characteristic findings on magnetic resonance imaging. After treatment with steroids, the visual loss recovered. Clinicians should retain an
index of suspicion of this rare condition in patients with visual impairment after acute pancreatitis. A 40-year-old female presented to our
emergency department with sudden visual loss over a 24-hour period. She was otherwise healthy, but had been admitted two weeks previously
with an episode of acute pancreatitis secondary to alcohol intake from which she had recovered uneventfully, and without any obvious
sequelae. An urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed. This revealed symmetrical areas of hypoattenuation in both
posterior parieto-occipital and cerebellar regions (Figures 1, 2). She was seen by a neurologist and diagnosed with posterior reversible
encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). After a two-month course of steroids she had almost complete resolution of her vision and the radiological
changes had improved. PRES is extremely rare, and usually diagnosed by a history of sudden visual impairment in the presence of specific
radiological changes on MRI. Bilateral symmetrical hypodensitities in the parieto-occipital areas and cerebellar hemispheres on imaging are
characteristic. The condition has been associated with chemotherapy, hypertension, infection and autoimmune disease.1 It is thought to occur
from temporary impairment of the blood brain barrier causing vasogenic edema with symptoms of reduced consciousness, seizures, headaches,
and typically visual problems.2 Around 26â€“67% of patients with PRES present with visual symptoms of blurred vision, visual neglect,
homonymous hemianopsia, hallucinations or cortical blindness. Our case is unusual, as PRES caused by pancreatitis has only been reported in
very sick patients with other comorbidities. It probably occurred in this case as a result of the systemic inflammatory response.3,4,5,6
Whilst pancreatitis itself can be life threatening, this case reminds clinicians of unusual complications that can occur after discharge of
patients who seem to have recovered from the disease. Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available through open access at
http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to
disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias.
The authors disclosed none. Magnetic resonance imaging scan showing symmetrical areas of increased signal in the occipital lobes (T2 and
FLAIR sequences). FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery Magnetic resonance imaging scan showing wedge-shaped area of increased signal
in the left cerebellar hemisphere (T2 and FLAIR sequences). FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
