The Editor, Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is the primary imaging modality for intraoperative assessment of cardiac anatomy and
valvular and ventricular function during cardiac surgery. We discuss a case of 25-year-old female having rheumatic heart disease with severe
mitral regurgitation and moderate aortic regurgitation posted for double valve replacement under cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB).
Postreplacement when the patient was being weaned off CPB, review TEE was done to check for adequate functioning of prosthetic valves,
detect any paravalvular leak and to see for residual or new deficit if any and to detect any other complication. Review TEE demonstrated
left atrial (LA) chamber deformation that was initially considered an intra-atrial lesion [Figure 1]. On careful examination, the lesion was
found to be surrounding the aortic root that was encroaching upon the LA dorsally. The lesion measured 4.0 cm × 1.5 cm and was of homogenous
echogenicity [Figure 2]. On color Doppler evaluation, no vascularity was detected in the lesion, thus ruling out aortic root dissection
[Figure 3]. The lesion was not causing obstruction of pulmonary venous and transmitral flows on Doppler evaluation. This finding was
communicated to the operating surgeon. After direct inspection and palpation, the lesion was found to be a hematoma at the posterior aortic
wall [Figure 4] which was encroaching the LA dorsally leading to an impression of the intra-atrial lesion in various views of TEE. Another
suture was taken at the hematoma site, and external compression was applied thus aiding in preventing the expansion of hematoma that could
have caused hemodynamic instability in the postoperative period, requiring re-exploration. (a and b) Mid-esophageal aortic valve short axis
view on transesophageal echocardiography giving the impression of left atrial shadow (a and b) Mid-esophageal long axis view and mid-
esophageal aortic valve short axis view on transesophageal echocardiography showing lesion of homogenous echogenicity surrounding the aortic
root Mid-esophageal long axis view on transesophageal echocardiography with color Doppler showing the absence of blood flow through the
lesion Hematoma seen at the posterior aspect of aortic root on direct palpation Postoperatively, during the initial 24 h, the patient had
atrial fibrillation with fast ventricular rate of 140–170/min without any hypotension. Review transthoracic echocardiography revealed a
reduction in the size of hematoma to 3.2 cm × 1.5 cm [Figure 5]. Heart rate slowed down to 114–120/min, 2 days after surgery. Rest of the
postoperative stay was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 7 days after surgery without any cardiovascular symptoms. The left atrium
is an inferoposteriorly located cardiac chamber with low intraluminal pressure. It has a relatively thin wall, making it particularly more
vulnerable to impression from the assorted structures. D’Cruz et al. proposed the subdivision of LA impression based on the severity of
anatomical deformation and its hemodynamic consequences into three different classes: (i) Proximity (a contiguous or adjacent structure
without chamber deformation), (ii) encroachment (distortion of normal cardiovascular architecture without hemodynamic effect), and (iii)
compression (where impression leads to severe inflow obstruction causing hemodynamic instability and symptoms). According to this, proximity
and encroachment does not lead to symptoms and are, therefore, mostly accidental findings. Postoperative day 1 review transthoracic
echocardiographic five chamber view showing reduction in the size of hematoma compared to immediate postoperative size Compression of the
left atrium reduces its volume causing low cardiac output, leading to dyspnea, reduced exercise tolerance, or even hemodynamic instability.
In addition, LA pressure rises with the subsequently elevated pulmonary venous pressure which may eventually lead to pulmonary edema. A
combination of these symptoms is often suggestive of heart failure or can mimic a cardiac tamponade. Even a slight impression of the left
atrium can be visualized using standard and color Doppler echocardiographic views. The round shape of the atrial wall becomes distorted.
These characteristics make TEE useful in diagnosing LA impression specially during the intraoperative period of cardiac surgeries and helps
to avoid any postoperative catastrophe. This report emphasizes the importance of TEE during the intraoperative period of cardiac surgeries.
Recognizing development of hematoma like in the case presented is of great concern during prosthetic valve replacement because of the
requirement of anticoagulation in the postoperative period; failure of which may lead to hemodynamic instability. Nil. There are no
conflicts of interest.
