Aldosterone-producing adrenocortical carcinoma is a rare malignancy, which is usually diagnosed by histopathological examination of the
excised tumor. In inoperable cases, aldosterone-producing ACC diagnosed by immunohistochemical staining of the metastatic tumor for
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 11β has not previously been reported and even in that case staining for adrenocortical-specific adrenal 4 binding
protein/steroidogenic factor1 (Ad4BP/SF1) and steroidogenic enzymes has not been reported. We report the case of a 67-year-old Japanese
woman with aldosterone-producing adrenocortical carcinoma. Laboratory findings showed severe hypopotassemia. Endocrinological examination
revealed an increased plasma aldosterone concentration and suppressed plasma renin activity. Plasma dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S)
was elevated. Diurnal variation in serum cortisol was lost and administration of 1 mg and 8 mg dexamethasone did not suppress serum cortisol
levels. From the 24-h urine collection sample, urine aldosterone and urine cortisol levels were greatly increased. Therefore, autonomous
excess production was observed for the three adrenal cortex hormones. Abdominal computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging showed a
right adrenal tumor and a huge liver tumor. Adrenocortical carcinoma with metastatic liver cancer was strongly suggested, however surgery
could not be considered due to stage IV disease: the liver tumor was too large and cardiac ultrasonography indicated that her cardiac
function was poor. Therefore, a liver biopsy was taken to properly determine the diagnosis. Immunohistochemical stains for Ad4BP/SF1 and
steroidogenic enzymes were positive. Ad4BP/SF-1 was originally identified as a steroidogenic, tissue-specific transcription factor
implicated in the expression of the steroidogenic CYP gene encoding cytochrome P450s. Hence we could diagnose the patient as having
adrenocortical carcinoma with metastatic liver cancer. This rare case had severe hypopotassemia accompanied with not only increased cortisol
and DHEA-S but also aldosterone. We reached the diagnosis of adrenocortical carcinoma with metastatic liver cancer based on positive
immunohistochemical staining of Ad4BP/SF1 in the liver biopsy specimen. We have reported the first case of aldosterone-producing
adrenocortical carcinoma diagnosed solely by immunohistochemical staining for adrenocortical-specific Ad4BP/SF1 and steroidogenic enzymes in
a metastatic liver tumor. Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare malignancy with an incidence of 1–2 per million people. ACC follows a
heterogeneous clinical course and a variable but generally poor prognosis . Approximately 60 % of ACCs are hormonally active, and
glucocorticoids and/or androgens are the steroids that are frequently over-secreted. A rapidly progressive Cushing’s syndrome with or
without virilization is the most frequent manifestation; estrogen or mineralocorticoid excess occurs in 10 % or fewer cases [1–3, 5]. ACC is
usually diagnosed by histopathological examination of the excised tumor. In inoperable cases, aldosterone-producing ACC diagnosed by
immunohistochemical staining of the metastatic tumor for Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 11β has not previously been reported and even in that case
staining for adrenocortical-specific adrenal 4 binding protein/steroidogenic factor1 (Ad4BP/SF1) and steroidogenic enzymes has not been
reported. Here we report the first case of aldosterone-producing ACC diagnosed by immunohistochemical staining in only the metastatic tumor
to detect both Ad4BP/SF1 and steroidogenic enzymes. A 67-year-old woman with a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension was referred to
our hospital for evaluation of hypopotassemia, a right adrenal tumor and a huge liver tumor. She complained of dizziness and weight loss. We
suspected that she had ACC and metastatic liver cancer. Physical examination showed thin skin, hirsutism, hepatomegaly and mild leg edema.
She did not have a cushingoid appearance with manifestations such as a moon face, central obesity and buffalo hump. Laboratory findings
(Table 1) showed severe hypopotassemia (K: 1.2 mmol/l), leukocytosis and liver damage. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen
19–9 (CA19-9) and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II (PIVKA-II)—which is a hepatocellular carcinoma marker—were
elevated.Table 1Laboratory
findingsUrineBiochemistry Protein(2+)AST107 IU/l Glucose(+)ALT68 IU/l Ketone(−)LDH1105 IU/l U-UN0.119 mg/dlChE3479 IU/l U-Cr11.3 mg/dlT-
Bil1.1 mg/dl U-Na28 mmol/lALP636 lU/l U-K15.3 mmol/lγ-GT344 IU/l U-Cl21 mmol/lTP6.6 g/dlAlb4.0 g/dlBlood cell
countUN24 mg/dl WBC16300/μlCr0.8 mg/dl Neutrophil84.6 %UA4.4 mg/dl Lymphocyte9.7 %Na145 mmol/l Monocyte5.5 %K1.2 mmol/l Eosinophil0.1 %Cl80 mmol/l Basophil0.1 %Ca8.8 mg/dl RBC4.59 × 106/μlPlasma
glucose159 mg/dl Hemoglobin14.4 g/dlHbA1c6.0 % Hematocrit43.5 %CRP6.2 mg/dl Platelet36.7 × 104/μlTumor markers CEA17.1 ng/ml
(5.8>)AFP4 ng/ml (10>) CA19-9294 U/ml (37>)PIVKAII183 mAU/ml (40>) Laboratory findings Endocrinological examination (Table 2) revealed an
increased plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC: 2040.0 pg/ml) and suppressed plasma renin activity (PRA: 0.3 ng/ml/h). Plasma DHEA-S was
elevated (294 μg/dl). Diurnal variation in serum cortisol was lost. Fasting plasma levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and cortisol
were less than 2.1 pg/ml (7.2–63.3) and 27.7 μg/dl (4.0–18.2), respectively, and administration of 1 mg and 8 mg dexamethasone did not
suppress serum cortisol levels. In addition, 24-h urine was collected, and the urinary aldosterone level was 230.0 μg/day (>10) and the
urinary cortisol level was 477.0 μg/day (11.2–80.3).Table 2Endocrinological examinationNormal rangeHormonal profile Serum ACTH (pg/ml)<
2.17.2–63.3 Serum cortisol (μg/dl)27.74.0–18.3 Plasma renin activity (ng/ml/hr)0.30.3–2.9 Plasma aldosterone concentration
(pg/ml)2040140–1030 Serum DHEA-S (μg/dl)29412–133 Serum 11-OHCS (μg/dl)566.07.0–23.0 Urinary free cortisol (μg/24 hr)477.011.2–80.3 Urinary
free aldosterone (μg/24 hr)230.0< 10Diurnal variation of plasma ACTH, cortisol levels9:0016:0023:00 Serum ACTH (pg/ml)< 2.1< 2.1< 2.1 Serum
cortisol (μg/dl)43.647.742.6Dexamethasone suppression test1 mg8 mg Serum ACTH (pg/ml)< 2.1< 2.1 Serum cortisol (μg/dl)36.039.1
Endocrinological examination Autonomous excess production was demonstrated for the three adrenal cortex hormones (aldosterone, cortisol and
DHEA-S). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed an internal heterogeneous right adrenal tumor (6 cm in diameter) with calcification as
well as a huge liver tumor (14 cm in diameter) with internal necrosis (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Abdominal dynamic computed tomography. Abdominal
dynamic computed tomography shows a huge liver tumor (14 cm in diameter) and right adrenal tumor (6 cm in diameter). a slice of liver tumor;
b slice of right adrenal tumor Abdominal dynamic computed tomography. Abdominal dynamic computed tomography shows a huge liver tumor (14 cm
in diameter) and right adrenal tumor (6 cm in diameter). a slice of liver tumor; b slice of right adrenal tumor As a result of laboratory
findings, endocrinological examination and abdominal enhanced CT and MRI, an ACC with widespread metastatic liver cancer was strongly
suggested. We wanted to excise the adrenal tumor including the liver tumor for diagnosis and treatment. But this case could not be
considered for surgery because of stage IV disease: the liver tumor was too large and cardiac ultrasonography indicated that her cardiac
function was poor (ejection fraction: 32 %). Therefore a liver biopsy was taken to determine the diagnosis. At histopathological
examination, hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining indicated a diagnosis of carcinoma. Hepatocyte paraffin 1 staining was negative in this
case, so this tumor was not a hepatocellular carcinoma. Immunohistochemical staining for Ad4BP/SF1 and steroidogenic enzymes were positive.
P450scc, 3β-HSD, P450c21, P450c17 and DHEA-ST were all positive (Figs. 2 and 3). Therefore, we finally reached a diagnosis of ACC with
metastatic liver cancer.Fig. 2Histopathological diagnosis by examination of liver biopsy specimen. a Tumor cells show large conspicuous
nuclei, nuclear atypicality, and acidophilic cytoplasm. Cells had a cord-like architectural pattern and alveolar structure (HE staining,
original magnification × 400); b Normal hepatocytes (HE, ×400); c These tumor cells are undyed; d Normal hepatocytes became stained (C, D:
Hepatocyte paraffin 1 staining, ×400); e-i Immunohistochemical stainings showed positive reactivity (E: Ad4BP/SF1, ×40; F: Ad4BP/SF1, ×400;
G: 3β-HSD, ×40; H: P450c21, ×40; I: Inhibinα, ×40). Black arrow: Ad4BP/SF1 was stained in a nucleus. White arrow: steroidogenic enzymes was
stained in cytoplasmFig. 3Steroid hormone biosynthesis pathway. We applied immunohistochemical staining for P450scc, 3β-HSD, P450c21,
P450c17 and DHEA-ST Histopathological diagnosis by examination of liver biopsy specimen. a Tumor cells show large conspicuous nuclei,
nuclear atypicality, and acidophilic cytoplasm. Cells had a cord-like architectural pattern and alveolar structure (HE staining, original
magnification × 400); b Normal hepatocytes (HE, ×400); c These tumor cells are undyed; d Normal hepatocytes became stained (C, D: Hepatocyte
paraffin 1 staining, ×400); e-i Immunohistochemical stainings showed positive reactivity (E: Ad4BP/SF1, ×40; F: Ad4BP/SF1, ×400; G: 3β-HSD,
×40; H: P450c21, ×40; I: Inhibinα, ×40). Black arrow: Ad4BP/SF1 was stained in a nucleus. White arrow: steroidogenic enzymes was stained in
cytoplasm Steroid hormone biosynthesis pathway. We applied immunohistochemical staining for P450scc, 3β-HSD, P450c21, P450c17 and DHEA-ST
Her prominent hypopotassium values improved (K 3.9 mmol/l) with administration of trilostane (240 mg/day). She was also administered
mitotane (1.5 g/day) with dexamethasone. Reductions in cortisol and aldosterone levels were gradually achieved (cortisol 23.5 μg/dl and PAC
246.0 pg/ml). However, at her request, she was transferred to another hospital where she died 3 months later. Here we reported the first
case of aldosterone-producing ACC diagnosed by immunohistochemical staining in only the metastatic tumor to detect both Ad4BP/SF1 and
steroidogenic enzymes. The present case demonstrated severe hypopotassemia accompanied with not only increased cortisol and DHEA-S but also
aldosterone. Approximately 60 % of ACCs are hormonally active, and glucocorticoids and/or androgens are frequently over-secreted.
Mineralocorticoid excess is very rare [1–3, 5]. Generally, there is a high suspicious for malignancy if adrenal tumors are larger than 6 cm
. Large clinically asymptomatic adrenal masses are treated surgically and then diagnosed by histopathological examination. A microscopic
diagnostic score (Weiss score) is the most commonly used tool . Surgery was not considered in this case because disease was classified as
stage IV : the liver tumor was too large and cardiac ultrasonography indicated that her cardiac function was poor. Local invasion, tumor
extension into the inferior vena cava as well as lymph nodes or other metastases (lung and liver) are often found in advanced ACC . After
various medical tests, ACC with widespread metastatic liver cancer was strongly suspected, and a liver biopsy was performed to rule out
hepatocellular carcinoma due to increased PIVKA-II score. With HE staining, tumor cells showed large conspicuous nuclei, nuclear
atypicality, and acidophilic cytoplasm that had a cord-like architectural pattern and alveolar structure. This tumor was diagnosed as a
carcinoma. Hepatocyte paraffin 1 staining was negative, thus indicating that this case did not have hepatocellular carcinoma. We applied
immunohistochemical staining for Ad4BP/SF1 and steroidogenic enzymes to distinguish whether cells in this tumor were those of ACC.
Ad4BP/SF-1 was originally identified as a steroidogenic, tissue-specific transcription factor implicated in the expression of the
steroidogenic CYP gene encoding cytochrome P450s . An immunohistochemical evaluation of Ad4BP/SF-1 can aid in this differential diagnosis
because nuclear immunoreactivity for this transcription factor is relatively specific to steroid-producing cells. It has been reported that
application of Ad4BP/SF-1 immunohistochemistry can greatly contribute to the differential diagnosis of ACC from other malignancies both at
primary and metastatic sites . In addition, it has been reported that Ad4BP/SF-1 is a very useful immunohistochemical marker in diagnosing
the origin of metastatic sites of ACC . This case had positive immunoreactivity for Ad4BP/SF1. Immunohistochemical staining for
steroidogenic enzymes also showed positive reactivity. P450scc, 3β-HSD, P450c21, P450c17 and DHEA-ST were all positive. Therefore we
diagnosed that this patient had ACC with metastatic liver cancer. We identified a case of distant recurrence of ACC after adrenalectomy that
was diagnosed by immunohistochemical staining for steroidogenic enzymes in a lung metastatic tumor . An ACC case with pulmonary metastasis
diagnosed by a pleural biopsy was also reported . However, in that pulmonary metastasis report, immunohistochemical staining for Ad4BP/SF1
and steroidogenic enzymes was not performed. We acknowledge several limitations in our report. First, we could not use immunohistochemical
staining to examine the original adrenal tumor for Ad4BP/SF1 and steroidogenic enzymes. Second, there is no evidence that this tumor
produced aldosterone, because we could not apply immunohistochemical staining for CYP11B1 and CYP11B2 in a metastatic tumor at that time.
Despite these limitations, we strongly suspected that these tumors produced aldosterone because PAC increased significantly as a result of
endocrinological examination. Here, we report a rare case of ACC with severe hypopotassemia accompanied not only increased cortisol and
DHEA-S but also aldosterone. We were successful in diagnosing the patient as having ACC with metastatic liver cancer based on positive
immunohistochemical staining of metastatic cancer for adrenocortical specific Ad4BP/SF1 and steroidogenic enzymes. Informed consent was
obtained from the patient’s family for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. 11-hydroxycorticosteroid
3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase Adrenocortical carcinoma Adrenal 4 binding protein/steroidogenic factor 1 Alpha fetoprotein Albumin Alkaline
phosphatase Alanine aminotransferase Aspartate aminotransferase Carbohydrate antigen 19–9 Carcinoembryonic antigen Cholinesterase C-reactive
protein Cytochrome P450 dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfotransferase HemglobinA1c Lactase dehydrogenase Cytochrome P450 17 Cytochrome P450 21
Cytochrome P450 side chain cleavage Protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II Red blood cell Total bilirubin Total protein Uric
acid Urine Creatinine Urine urea nitrogen White blood cell γ-glutamyltranspeptidase Kennosuke Ohashi and Takeshi Hayashi contributed equally
to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions KO designed and drafted
the manuscript and interpreted the data. TH, MS, HS and KU revised the manuscript. KO, TH, HI, TE and KT participated in the
endocrinological treatment, and collected the data. HS performed immunohistochemical evaluations. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. None.
