Peliosis hepatis is a benign disorder, histologically characterized by blood-filled cystic cavities of various sizes and irregular shapes,
communicating with the hepatic sinusoids and associated with rupture of the reticulin framework. This entity is rare, but as the use of
modern cross-sectional imaging studies increases in the medical practice, it is more frequently encountered than before. While it has been
described that the lesions typically involve the entire liver in the past, focal type of peliosis hepatis has been increasingly reported
recently. In this article, we present imaging findings in a case of focal peliosis hepatis, which mimicked the other hepatic tumors or
inflammatory masses. An asymptomatic 31-year-old female patient presented with incidentally found liver mass on screening sonography. Her
clinical history did not include any specific disease, family history was unremarkable, and physical examination was unremarkable. She
denied abuse of drug or alcohol. She didn't intake steroids or oral contraceptives. The results of routine laboratory investigations were
unremarkable; hemoglobin, 13.9 g/dL; leukocyte count, 8,000/mm3; platelet count, 274,000/mm3; total protein 6.6 g/dL; albumin, 4.2 g/dL;
total bilirubin, 0.5 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 17 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 13 IU/L; gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, 17 IU/L.
Serologic tests for hepatitis A, B, and C were negative. Tumor markers including AFP, CEA, and CA 19-9 were all within normal ranges.
Abdominal sonography showed about 3 cm, oval shape mass-like lesion with heterogeneous echogenicity in the right hepatic lobe (Fig. 1A).
Otherwise, echogenicity and echotexture of the background liver was unremarkable. Doppler study revealed no hypervascularity of the lesion
and no remarkable perilesional hemodynamic abnormality. CT scans were obtained for further evaluation of hepatic mass. On noncontrast CT,
the lesion showed mild low density compared with adjacent parenchyma (Fig. 1B). Liver density was normal, with no evidence of hepatic
steatosis or iron overload. On contrast-enhanced CT during the hepatic arterial phase, the lesion showed lack of enhancement and an
irregular and infiltrative margin (Fig. 1C). Most part of the lesion demonstrated isoattenuating enhancement with adjacent liver on venous
phase, except small branching tubule-like low attenuation in the center (Fig. 1D). There was no evidence of portal thrombophlebitis or bile
duct dilatation around the lesion. The radiological differential diagnoses were in wide range, including organizing abscess, sclerosing
hemangioma, and hypovascular hepatic malignancy such as cholangiocarcinoma or metastasis. Percutaneous biopsy was performed under
sonographic guidance. Histopathologic examination revealed localized marked dilatation of sinusoids forming blood-filled spaces and thinning
of hepatic cell cords (Fig. 1E) and reticulin fiber network was lost in the affected area leading to the diagnosis of peliosis hepatis (Fig.
1F). The dilated sinusoidal cells were negative for CD 34, but were positive for factor VIII (not shown), further supporting the diagnosis
of peliosis hepatis. The patient was discharged after the biopsy and was found to stay in good health at the recent follow-up (> 2-year
period). There lesion didn't progress or regress on follow-up imaging studies (not shown). The etiology or pathogenesis of peliosis hepatis
remains unclear. It has been reported previously that this entity is diffuse, frequently related to debilitating underlying diseases,
chronic alcoholism, intravenous drug abuse, or long-term use of anabolic steroids or oral contraceptives.1 However, as the use of modern
cross-sectional imaging studies increases even in the asymptomatic population for the purpose of health care, more and more cases of focal
peliosis hepatis are incidentally found nowadays in subjects with no underlying diseases or possible predisposing factors.23 Radiologic
findings of focal peliosis hepatis may vary depending on the size of the lesion, the presence or absence of thrombus and hemorrhage within
the cavities. A recent study has shown that dynamic enhancement patterns of focal peliosis hepatis may vary depending on the pathological
findings.4 In their study, hypervascular enhancement mimicking hepatocellular carcinoma or hypervascular metastasis could be appreciated on
the arterial phase of dynamic CT or MRI when there was fresh and actively circulating blood within the dilated sinusoid. In contrast, when
there was old and stagnated blood within the spaces in conjunction with hepatocyte degeneration or atrophy, dynamic studies tended to show
persistently low or slow centripetal enhancement of the lesion on portal or delayed phase images, similar as in our case. In such
circumstances, the lesion should be differentiated from atypical hypovascular malignant hepatic tumors such as cholangiocarcinoma,
epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, or metastasis especially in patients with underlying malignancy. In addition to the absence of suggestive
findings of such tumors (e.g. accompanying bile duct dilatation, multinodular coalescent appearance, capsular retraction, and peripheral
ring-like enhancement during the arterial phase), an ill-defined, irregular, non-tumefactive margin and the lack of mass effect can be
differential points suggestive of peliosis hepatis. Moreover, the late iso-attenuating enhancement in our case, representing the venous
pooling at the dilated sinusoids, may be another clue for the diagnosis of peliosis hepatis.5 However, this finding should be cautiously
differentiated from the slow progressive enhancement in the sclerotic stroma of hypovascular malignant tumors. Similar enhancement patterns
can be also appreciated in some benign hepatic lesions with abundant sclerosis such as sclerosing hemangioma and organizing abscess, and
these entities should be also included in the differential diagnosis. The definitive diagnosis of peliosis hepatis is established by
histopathology. Therefore, a percutaneous needle biopsy can be used to confirm the diagnosis, if peliosis hepatis is suspected on the
imaging studies. As peliosis hepatis may present with a broad spectrum of potentially misleading findings on imaging studies, a high level
of suspicion is a prerequisite for the diagnosis. Peliosis hepatis should be suspected when an incidental focal liver lesion shows no
specific findings that clearly favor the diagnosis of the common hepatic tumors and tumor-like lesions. Non-tumefactive margin, the lack of
mass effect, and late iso-attenuating enhancement during the venous or delayed phase on dynamic post-contrast study may further raise the
suspicion. Establishing the diagnosis with biopsy, then the management and monitoring of the lesion can be tailored based on the location
and extent of the lesion, the damage to liver function, and the presence or absence of complications. Although peliosis hepatis is a rare
entity, it is increasingly found as a focal liver lesion in the routine practice with the popular use of modern cross-sectional imaging
studies. As peliosis hepatis may present with a broad spectrum of potentially misleading findings on imaging studies, a high level of
suspicion is a prerequisite for the diagnosis. Peliosis hepatis should be suspected when the imaging findings of an incidental focal liver
lesion do not favor the diagnosis of the common hepatic tumors and tumor-like lesions. Non-tumefactive margin, the lack of mass effect, and
late iso-attenuating enhancement on dynamic post-contrast study may further raise the suspicion. Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no
conflicts to disclose. computed tomography Î±-fetoprotein carcinoembryonic antigen carbohydrate antigen magnetic resonance imaging
