The carpal scaphoid is the most commonly fractured carpal bone in young adults after a fall on an outstretched arm that results in acute
dorsal flexion of the wrist. However, stress fractures of the scaphoid are relatively rare. To the best of our knowledge, we describe the
first case in the literature of carpal scaphoid stress fracture in a tennis player. An 18-year-old Japanese man who was an elite junior
tennis player was referred to our hospital after radiography and computed tomography revealed a carpal scaphoid fracture. The patient
presented with pain in the wrist joint and tenderness over the anatomical snuff-box with diffuse swelling and reduced active dorsal flexion
and flexion of the right wrist. The patient was treated conservatively and resumed participation in competitive events 5 months after his
initial presentation. In this case, the scaphoid stress fracture had resulted from repetitive practicing of the attacking backhand high
volley, which involved excessive dorsal flexion of the wrist. Although rare, scaphoid stress fractures must be considered in tennis players
with chronic wrist pain. Stress fracture of the scaphoid has been attributed to repeated dorsal flexion of the wrist . Carpal scaphoid
stress fractures have been reported in individuals engaging in gymnastics, shot put, diving, badminton, and cricket . To the best of our
knowledge, we report the first case in the literature of carpal scaphoid stress fracture in an elite junior tennis player. In our patient,
the scaphoid stress fracture was a result of repetitive practice of the backhand high volley, which required excessive dorsal flexion of the
wrist. An 18-year-old man who was an elite junior tennis player developed severe pain over the dorsal aspect of his right wrist when he hit
a backhand volley in a tournament match. There was no major trauma, but he could not continue playing in the match and therefore visited a
local clinic. On the basis of radiography and computed tomography (CT) findings, he was diagnosed with a carpal scaphoid fracture and was
referred to our facility. The patient is a right-handed player and mainly hits one-handed forehand and one-handed backhand shots. For 4
months before presentation, he had been repeatedly practicing his backhand volley, especially the attacking backhand high volley. He began
to experience gradual pain in the right wrist, which worsened with wrist dorsal flexion. However, he had not visited any medical facility
and had continued practicing tennis. His physical examination revealed tenderness over the anatomical snuff-box, with diffuse swelling. The
active dorsal flexion and volar flexion of the right wrist was 10 degrees less than in the left wrist, and forced passive dorsal flexion and
volar flexion of the right wrist caused increased pain over the wrist joint. Pronation and supination of the forearm and digital motion were
within normal limits. Radiographs revealed a nondisplaced scaphoid waist fracture through the carpal scaphoid with slightly increased bone
density at the edge of the fracture line (Fig. 1). CT also revealed a nondisplaced scaphoid fracture at its waist, and both sclerotic and
cystic changes were observed (Fig. 2). This finding, together with the patient’s history, suggested stress fracture of the scaphoid.Fig.
1Radiographs obtained at the first visit show a nondisplaced scaphoid waist fracture through the carpal scaphoid with slightly increased
bone densityFig. 2Computed tomographic image from the first visit shows a nondisplaced fracture at the scaphoid waist. Sclerotic and cystic
changes suggest stress fractures of the scaphoid Radiographs obtained at the first visit show a nondisplaced scaphoid waist fracture through
the carpal scaphoid with slightly increased bone density Computed tomographic image from the first visit shows a nondisplaced fracture at
the scaphoid waist. Sclerotic and cystic changes suggest stress fractures of the scaphoid Magnetic resonance imaging performed 2 weeks after
the patient’s initial presentation showed low intensity on the T1-weighted image, isointensity to high intensity on the T2-weighted image,
and low intensity on the T2-weighted image, with fat suppression at the waist of the scaphoid (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Magnetic resonance imaging
scans obtained 2 weeks after the patient’s initial presentation. Low intensity can be seen on the T1-weighted image (a), isointensity to
high intensity on the T2-weighted image (b), and low intensity on the T2-weighted image, with fat suppression (c) at the waist of the
scaphoid Magnetic resonance imaging scans obtained 2 weeks after the patient’s initial presentation. Low intensity can be seen on the
T1-weighted image (a), isointensity to high intensity on the T2-weighted image (b), and low intensity on the T2-weighted image, with fat
suppression (c) at the waist of the scaphoid For treatment, we proposed either conservative therapy or surgery, and the patient chose to
follow a course of conservative therapy. His right wrist was immobilized in a short thumb spica cast for 4 weeks, followed by a wrist brace
(WRIST CARE PRO, ALCARE Co., Tokyo, Japan) for another 8 weeks. After cast immobilization, the patient was instructed, under the supervision
of an occupational therapist, how to best perform active dorsal flexion and volar flexion. He was encouraged to perform this rehabilitation
regimen at least three times daily without the wrist brace. Eight weeks after his initial presentation (4 weeks after cast immobilization),
he displayed no tenderness over the anatomical snuff-box. Subsequently, he was instructed to perform passive dorsal flexion and volar
flexion of the wrist. Three months after the patient’s initial presentation, a CT scan showed that the fracture had healed and the patient
was asymptomatic (Fig. 4). He was allowed to gradually return to playing tennis, starting with forehand strokes that do not require dorsal
flexion of the wrist on impact. When he was able to hit forehand strokes normally without any symptoms, he slowly began practicing backhand
strokes. Five months after his initial presentation, he resumed participation in competitive events. At his final examination, 1 year after
presentation, the range of motion of his wrist was normal and he had experienced no recurrence of wrist pain. The patient was completely
satisfied with the result.Fig. 4Computed tomography performed 3 months after the initial presentation. The image shows complete healing of
the fracture Computed tomography performed 3 months after the initial presentation. The image shows complete healing of the fracture The
carpal scaphoid is the most commonly fractured carpal bone . Carpal scaphoid fractures usually occur in young adults after a fall on an
outstretched arm that results in acute dorsal flexion of the wrist . However, stress fractures of the scaphoid are relatively rare, and
although such cases have been reported in relation to other sports , we believe this is the first report of carpal scaphoid fracture in a
tennis player (Table 1).Table 1Previously reported stress fractures of the carpal scaphoidReportPatient age (yr), sexSportTreatmentPeriod
required to return to sportsManzione and Pizzutillo, 1981 16, MGymnastConservative10 wkHanks et al., 1989 19, MShot put (n =
1),Conservative12–32 wk18, MGymnastics (n = 3)18, M18, MEngel and Feldner-Busztin, 1991 18, MGymnasticsNot mentionedNot mentionedInagaki and
Inoue, 1997 16, MBadmintonConservative11 wkMatzkin and Singer, 2000 13, FGymnasticsConservative24 wkHosey et al., 2006 13, FDivingInternal
fixationNot mentionedRethnam et al., 2006 38, MCricketConservativeNot mentionedYamagiwa et al., 2009 18, MGymnasticsConservative, internal
fixation8 wkNakamoto et al., 2011 18, MGymnasticsInternal fixation12 wkPidemunt et al., 2012 13, MSoccer goalkeeperInternal fixation24 wkOur
patient18 MTennisConservative20 wk Previously reported stress fractures of the carpal scaphoid In a biomechanical study, Majima et al.
reported that loading patterns at the wrist are different in the dorsally flexed position than in the neutral position. When the wrist is
placed in the dorsally flexed position, force transmission shifts radially and concentrates at the scaphoid . Extreme dorsal flexion
compresses the radioscaphoid articulation and drives the scaphoid to the volar side. The volar radioscapholunate and radiocapitate ligaments
resist the volar force from the proximal scaphoid. Distal to these are less restrictive radiocollateral ligaments, which make the scaphoid
just distal to the proximal volar ligaments biomechanically the weakest point . This is where the fracture line was observed in our patient:
the waist of the scaphoid. Modern tennis players require a wide range of wrist movements for the various strokes and volleys. In backhand
strokes and backhand volleys, the wrist is in neutral to 2–5 degrees of radial deviation and requires dorsal flexion of the wrist upon
impact, especially in advanced players . Chow et al. reported that muscle activation of the extensor carpi radialis in the backhand volley
was greater than for the forehand volley in both the pre- and postimpact phases . This suggests that dorsal flexion plays an important role
in the backhand volley. We concluded that the initial cause of the stress fracture in our patient was excessive and repetitive practice of
the attacking backhand high volley. This exertion resulted in the carpal scaphoid receiving repetitive shearing and torsional forces,
causing a stress fracture at the scaphoid waist. To prevent injury recurrence, the patient was advised to change the form of the backhand
volley and not to dorsally flex the wrist excessively. Because the attacking backhand high volley is a relatively less necessary shot in
tennis, the patient was advised not to overpractice the shot. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case in the
literature of carpal scaphoid stress fracture in a tennis player. Repetitive practice of the backhand volley, which requires excessive
dorsal flexion of the wrist, led to a stress fracture of the carpal scaphoid. A sound bony union was obtained with conservative therapy, and
the patient resumed participating in competitive tennis within 5 months of initial presentation. Although scaphoid stress fracture is
comparatively rare, we suggest that it must be considered in the differential diagnosis when tennis players present with chronic wrist pain.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions SK was a major contributor in the writing of the manuscript. AK performed the physical
examination at the patient’s initial presentation. TT, YH and MY have checked and corrected the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript. We thank Thomas Mayers for English-language revision of the manuscript.
