Massive gastrointestinal bleeding is an emergency that can sometimes require immediate surgery. We report the first case, to the best of our
knowledge, of massive rectal bleeding due to Yersinia enterocolitica, requiring ileocecal resection. A 41-year-old North African woman was
admitted to our emergency department for massive rectal bleeding. She had a history of an iron deficiency anemia of unknown cause, and
diarrhea 2 months before the admission. On admission to our emergency unit, she was in a state of hemodynamic collapse. An examination
showed discolored conjunctivas, massive rectal bleeding with clots and no abdominal pain. The first medical treatment included the use of
noradrenaline. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed and did not show any lesions. Computed tomography of her abdomen showed
significant and hypervascular wall thickening of her terminal ileum suggestive of a tumor. Because her massive rectal bleeding worsened and
her collapse persisted, an exploratory laparotomy and ileocecal resection were immediately performed on the patient. Histopathological
analysis showed enteritis caused by Yersinia enterocolitica. Her outcome was favorable. Enteritis due to Yersinia enterocolitica can take a
pseudotumoral form and mislead the diagnosis of gastrointestinal bleeding. Yersinia enterocolitica is a bacterium responsible for enteritis.
Its symptoms are usually abdominal pain, fever, vomiting and diarrhea. Several case reports present unusual manifestations of Yersinia
infections. Pseudotumoral forms and bowel perforations were reported. We here report a case of massive rectal bleeding resulting in collapse
due to Yersinia enterocolitica. A 41-year-old North African woman with a history of chronic anemia with iron supplementation intake
presented to our emergency department. She had massive rectal bleeding. She had an iron deficiency anemia. She did not complete the
investigations so the cause was not yet diagnosed. She had no chronic bleeding, neither gynecologic nor digestive. She was treated by oral
iron with no regular follow up. She had no past surgical interventions, and no other medical condition. She had no contact with animals.
There were no medical conditions in her family, no cancers and no current infections. No one in her family or neighborhood was diagnosed
with tuberculosis. In our admission unit, her hemodynamic parameters showed that she was in shock: her blood pressure was 80/40 mmHg and her
pulse was up to 120 beats per minute. She was pale, her conjunctivas were discolored and her limbs were cold. While examining her, we found
profuse rectal bleeding with clots. A quick abdominal and pelvis examination including proctologic examination appeared normal. She was
transferred to our intensive care unit and monitored. Noradrenaline was administered because the crystalloid fluids and the transfusion were
not sufficient to compensate for her blood loss. Several blood tests were conducted, including blood count and clotting tests. Her
hemoglobin was 8 g/dl and hematocrit was 29 %. The rest of the formula and the clotting tests returned normal results as shown in
Table 1.Table 1Results of biological tests on the day of
admissionHgbMCVMCHCHematocritWBCPlateletsPRUreaCreatininSodiumPotassium8 g/dl813229 %5660160,00087 %0.3 g/l12 mg/l135 mEq/l4.1 mEq/lHgb
hemoglobin, MCHC mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, MCV mean corpuscular volume, PR prothrombin ratio, WBC white blood cells Results
of biological tests on the day of admission Hgb hemoglobin, MCHC mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, MCV mean corpuscular volume, PR
prothrombin ratio, WBC white blood cells She first underwent an esogastroduodenoscopy, to identify the source of the bleeding. No
abnormality was detected in the said procedure: the esophageal and gastric mucosa were normal, no ulcerations or traces of blood were found,
and the duodenal mucosa was also explored and appeared normal. A colonoscopy could not be carried out because of the profuse rectal
bleeding. She underwent a computed tomography (CT) of her abdomen which revealed a wall thickening in the terminal ileum with
hypervascularization and regional adenomegalies (Figs. 1, 2, 3 and 4). This aspect suggested either a tumor or an inflammatory bowel
disease.Fig. 1Abdominal computed tomography of the abdomen showing an irregular wall thickeningFig. 2Abdominal computed tomography of the
abdomen showing an ileocecal wall thickeningFig. 3Abdominal computed tomography of the abdomen showing regional adenomegaliesFig. 4Abdominal
computed tomography of the abdomen showing an infiltrative aspect and regional nodes Abdominal computed tomography of the abdomen showing an
irregular wall thickening Abdominal computed tomography of the abdomen showing an ileocecal wall thickening Abdominal computed tomography of
the abdomen showing regional adenomegalies Abdominal computed tomography of the abdomen showing an infiltrative aspect and regional nodes
Because her bleeding and her hemodynamic collapse persisted, it was decided to proceed with surgery with the aim of diagnosis and treatment.
She underwent exploratory laparotomy immediately. It confirmed the wall thickening in her ileocecal junction. Her appendix was inflamed. An
ileocecal resection was performed with an ileocolic anastomosis, removing 10 cm from her ileum. The specimen was sent for histological
examination. Gross examination showed a round ulcer 5 cm from the ileal end, next to another ulcerative lesion; eight lymphatic nodes were
found. The blood vessel under the deep ulcer was the origin of the profuse bleeding. The histopathological examination showed an
inflammatory ulcerative reaction with microabscesses (Figs. 5, 6 and 7). A granulomatous necrotic reaction was revealed in the examination
of all eight nodes (Fig. 8). The pathologist’s report concluded with diagnosis of an infection due to Yersinia enterocolitica.Fig.
5Histopathological examination of the colic mucosa showing an inflammatory aspect with regular glandsFig. 6Histopathological examination of
the ileocecal tissue showing inflammation and microabcessesFig. 7Histopathological examination of the ileocecal tissue showing marks of
bloodFig. 8Histopathological examination of the adenomegalies showing a necrosis Histopathological examination of the colic mucosa showing
an inflammatory aspect with regular glands Histopathological examination of the ileocecal tissue showing inflammation and microabcesses
Histopathological examination of the ileocecal tissue showing marks of blood Histopathological examination of the adenomegalies showing a
necrosis Her immediate postoperative outcome was favorable, the bleeding stopped, and her hemodynamic parameters remained stable. She had a
normal transit on the fifth day after the intervention. After receiving the pathologist’s report, it was decided to treat her with
fluoroquinolones 500 mg twice daily without discontinuing the iron supplementation, and a clinical control was scheduled. At the control
3 weeks later, she had no clinical symptoms, her diarrhea and bleeding had ended, and signs of anemia were diminishing. Antibiotherapy was
discontinued. Yersinia is a genus of Gram-negative aerobic facultative bacilli. Yersinia enterocolitica is one of the species in this genus
that can cause human diseases. The other two are Yersinia pseudotuberculosis and Yersinia pestis . It is found in milk, pork and other
domestic animals. The transmission can happen through consumption of contaminated food or water . It is more frequent in the pediatric
population (less than 10-years old) . The clinical manifestations of a Yersinia enterocolitica infection in humans include fever, abdominal
pain, diarrhea and vomiting. In a study reported by Saebø et al., which registered the clinical aspects in patients with yersiniosis for a
duration of 9 years, predominant symptoms were diarrhea, abdominal pain, vomiting and weight loss . The appendix is involved in 40 % of
cases according to Vantrappen et al. . Its tropism for the lymphoid tissue explains the pseudo-appendicular form and the mesenteric
lymphadenitis . In fact, in a reported outbreak of Yersinia enterocolitica infection associated with contaminated chocolate milk, half of
the affected patients underwent laparotomy for suspected acute appendicitis . Extraintestinal manifestations can occur. Cases of septic
arthritis have been reported . Patients with immune depression, diabetes, iron overload, cirrhosis or hepatic disease are particularly
susceptible to disseminated Yersinia enterocolitica infection . Hepatic abscesses, septicemia and encephalitis have been reported in such
cases . Bacteremia has also been reported in babies . The infection can last several months. The evolution that had been noticed indicates
that yersiniosis is a chronic state . Radiological aspects include terminal ileitis over a distance of 10 to 20 cm. Irregular or nodular
mucosal pattern and pictures suggestive of ulcerations are the most frequent radiological signs. Signs of colitis and aphthoid ulcers are
noticed in endoscopy in some cases . In fact, Naddei et al. report a case of yersiniosis mimicking Crohn’s disease in an 11-year-old boy
with recurrent abdominal pain : “Ileo-colonoscopy showed the presence of granularities and aphthous ulcers at the terminal ileum” . Homewood
et al. reported a case of fulminating ileitis in a 20-year-old woman with abdominal pain and diarrhea that turned out to be a Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis infection . The CT showed a thickening in the terminal ileum and their surgical exploration found ileal ulcers. The woman
was subsequently diagnosed with Crohn’s disease. In fact, Yersinia infection was reported to be associated in some cases with intestinal
bowel disease (IBD) [13, 14]. This was also noticed through the long-term follow up of patients with initial yersiniosis [4, 15]. Yersinia
infection often manifests with gastrointestinal ulcers, especially in the terminal ileum; perianal and colonic ulcers have also been
reported . The presence of gastrointestinal ulcers can cause minor digestive bleeding leading to iron deficiency anemia but very rarely a
massive bleed and a collapse as was the case for our patient. Yersinia infection can also take a pseudotumoral form on radiological
examination. A case of pseudotumoral form due to Yersinia pseudotuberculosis that required a hemicolectomy was reported : a 56-year-old man
admitted for abdominal pain, vomiting and distension. Clinical examination was suggestive of intestinal obstruction. A CT scan showed wall
thickening in the cecum and the terminal ileum. The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy with right hemicolectomy. The diagnosis of
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis enteritis was revealed through the histopathological examination . Ileal perforation due to Yersinia
enterocolitica has also been reported . In this case, the patient needed surgery for pelviperitonitis due to an intestinal perforation.
Necrotic-ulcerative ileitis with adenomesenteritis from Yersinia enterocolitica was found. The progression was favorable after intestinal
resection and antibiotic therapy . Only one case of small bowel gangrene due to Yersinia enterocolitica was reported in the literature .
There is also one reported instance of gangrene due to Yersinia pseudotuberculosis . Diagnosis of Yersinia enterocolitica infection is
usually suspected from the clinical presentation. It is then confirmed by blood and stool cultures, serological tests and histopathological
examination [6, 11, 20, 21]. The best antibiotic treatment seems to be fluoroquinolones, alone or in combination, or third-generation
cephalosporins . In our case, the patient presented diarrhea for 2 months followed by an acute episode of massive rectal bleeding, with
hemodynamic collapse. Proctologic examination did not show any anal lesions. In this case, the most frequent etiologies are angiodysplasia
and diverticulosis, but massive rectal bleeding can also be caused by an upper gastrointestinal lesion: gastric or duodenal ulcer,
esophageal varices, tumors or angiodysplasia. An upper endoscopy of our patient showed a normal esogastroduodenal mucosa. It was not
possible to perform a colonoscopy given the urge of obtaining a diagnosis for her. Therefore, it was decided to proceed with an abdominal CT
with an injection of contrast material. The abdominal CT revealed ileocecal pathology: wall thickening in her terminal ileum with
hypervascularization and regional adenomegalies. An IBD, particularly Crohn’s disease, was suspected. Reasons for this were her young age,
gender (female), history of diarrhea in the preceding few months and past chronic iron deficiency anemia, digestive bleeding and the
ileocecal localization. Deep ulcers would have been the origin of the massive bleeding. This happens in 5 % of IBD . The presence of a tumor
such as adenocarcinoma could not be ruled out. Grelic and colic tumors can be responsible for 11 to 20 % of low digestive bleeding . The
fast progression of the symptomatology in our patient’s case, her age, and the absence of familial neoplasia made this less likely. However,
the hypervascular characteristic and the regional nodes suggested a carcinoid tumor. This latter can be revealed through a complication such
as digestive bleeding. The presence of diarrhea was also an argument, although the carcinoid syndrome was not complete. Her massive bleeding
causing a hemodynamic collapse made the infectious origin less probable. Nevertheless, ileocecal tuberculosis could not be ruled out because
of the frequency of tuberculosis in the country. Concerning other infectious causes, Yersinia, Campylobacter and Salmonella are the ones
most frequently associated with ileal involvement, and pseudotumoral forms have been reported especially in Yersinia enterocolitica and
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, but no case of massive bleeding was reported. At the surgical exploration step, gross examination of the tissue
revealed ulcers and it confirmed the wall thickening of her terminal ileum. This kept the diagnosis discussion focused on the same path. A
histopathological examination unexpectedly revealed signs of Yersinia enterocolitica enteritis. Her clinical evolution was favorable. Her
bleeding and diarrhea stopped and her hemodynamic state remained stable. Her medium-term postoperative evolution was favorable as was her
long-term follow up. Yersinia enterocolitica infection can heal spontaneously with no complications. However, through this case report and
the literature review, we see that some of its manifestations can be potentially fatal. This diagnosis has to be suspected whenever an acute
abdominal syndrome is unexplained. Endoscopy is often performed to rule out other diagnoses. This allows for biopsy which helps to confirm
the diagnosis. Microbacteriological tests can be helpful when they actively identify Yersinia enterocolitica. The treatment is generally
based on antibiotic therapy but some cases need surgical intervention. The practical management of massive rectal bleeding due to Yersinia
enterocolitica requires hemodynamic monitoring first. Surgery is needed to stop the bleeding if the latter is not controlled adequately.
Yersinia enterocolitica is a species of Yersinia responsible for human disease. Abdominal pain, fever and diarrhea are noted in the most
frequent clinical presentations of this infection. However, it can be responsible for pseudoappendicitis syndrome, terminal ileitis and wall
thickening. Also, as it was in our case, it can cause significant digestive bleeding with an ulcerative and pseudotumoral form and regional
nodes that can mislead the diagnosis. This case report is particularly relevant to the gastroenterological field, emergency medicine,
surgery and the study of infectious diseases. Enteritis due to Yersinia enterocolitica or Yersinia in general is an etiology to keep in mind
even if digestive symptoms mimic a surgical emergency. Through its ulcerative presentation, Yersinia infection can be the origin of
digestive bleeding. Whenever it is possible, endoscopy with bacteriological and histopathological analysis can confirm the diagnosis, and
radiology and surgery can also be helpful. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. computed tomography
intestinal bowel disease Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions IA
contributed to the redaction of the article and the literature review, AB contributed to the endoscopic exploration of the patient and the
interpretation of data. NMB contributed to the interpretation of imagery and the radiological discussion. ME and AJ contributed to the
interpretation of the histology. NK contributed to the correction of the manuscript and the literature review. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript. I would like to aknowledge Hazim Azghari, Naeem Nisar Sheikh and Suhail Aslam for their precious help.
