Pyogenic tonsillitis may often be observed in the general Western population. In severe cases, it may require antibiotic treatment or even
hospitalization and often a prompt clinical response will be noted. Here we present an unusual case of progressive multiple organ failure
including fulminant liver failure following acute tonsillitis initially mistaken for “classic” pyogenic (that is bacterial) tonsillitis. A
68-year-old previously healthy white man was referred with suspicion of pyogenic angina. After tonsillectomy, he developed acute liver
failure and consecutive multiple organ failure including acute hemodynamic, pulmonary and dialysis-dependent renal failure.
Immunohistopathological analysis of his tonsils and liver as well as serum polymerase chain reaction analyses revealed herpes simplex
virus-2 to be the causative pathogen. Treatment included high-dose acyclovir and multiorgan supportive intensive care therapy. His final
outcome was favorable. Fulminant herpes simplex virus-2-induced multiple organ failure is rarely observed in the Western hemisphere and
should be considered a potential diagnosis in patients with tonsillitis and multiple organ failure including acute liver failure. From a
clinical perspective, it seems important to note that fulminant herpes simplex virus-2 infection may masquerade as “routine” bacterial
severe sepsis/septic shock. This persevering condition should be diagnosed early and treated goal-oriented in order to gain control of this
life-threatening condition. In the general Western population, pyogenic (that is bacterial) tonsillitis may often be observed and it is
known to account for a large number of pre-clinical consultations. In severe cases, it may require antibiotic treatment or even
hospitalization and a prompt clinical response will often be noted . Here we present an unusual case of progressive multiple organ failure
including fulminant liver failure following acute non-bacterial tonsillitis. We will furthermore report and discuss pitfalls in the clinical
management of such life-threatening non-bacterial tonsillitis. A 68-year-old white man with an insignificant past medical history (including
sexual history) was referred to our tertiary care academic center with symptoms of acute tonsillitis, clinically not responding to
antibiotic treatment with oral amoxicillin-clavulanic acid. Following a 2-day course of moderate fever (38 °C) and sore throat with highly
elevated infection parameters of C-reactive protein 280 mg/l, white blood cell count (WBC) 4.8 G/L, and platelets 106 G/L, he was
hospitalized for intravenous antibiotic treatement. An initial physical examination at admission was unremarkable. Due to a progressive
elevation in his inflammatory markers along with clinical deterioration and progressive tonsillar inflammation, a left-sided tonsillectomy
was performed 48 hours after his hospital admission. During his postoperative course, fulminant acute liver failure (ALF) was observed and
he was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU) for further investigations and supportive intensive care treatment. At ICU admission,
laboratory analyses revealed leukopenia (1.8 G/l) with pan-lymphopenia and marked elevation of indices of liver dysfunction (Table 1).
Toxic, vascular/ischemic, autoimmune, or metabolic liver disease was considered unlikely following anamnesis and respective laboratory tests
(please also refer to Table 1). In addition to laboratory signs of ALF, the patient soon developed acute kidney injury/failure: risk,
injury, failure, loss of kidney function, and end-stage kidney disease (RIFLE) category “F”. An emergency abdominal ultrasound revealed
moderate hepatic steatosis, and computed tomography imaging revealed inhomogeneous hepatic steatosis, ascites and moderate splenomegaly. A
retropharyngeal abscess was ruled out. Infective tonsillitis-induced septic shock with progressive multiple organ failure was suspected and
the initial antibiotic treatment using amoxicillin-clavulanic acid was changed to ciprofloxacin, Cubicin (daptomycin) and metronidazole.
During the further course of the disease, supportive medical treatment included high-dose acetylcysteine, vitamin K and lactulose. However,
further worsening of liver function tests was noted and a decision for a transjugular liver biopsy was established 48 hours following his
ICU admission. Initial histologic findings revealed diffuse hepatic necrosis compatible with viral hepatitis (Fig. 1); empirical antiviral
treatment using ganciclovir (500 mg single-shot, followed by 450 mg twice a day) was commenced in order to cover cytomegalovirus (CMV) and
herpes simplex virus (HSV). In addition, initial results showed seropositivity for HSV-2 immunoglobulin G (IgG), Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)
IgG and CMV IgG. Serological testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and for hepatitis B and hepatitis C revealed negative results.
Final histological results of his liver then demonstrated significant HSV-1 and HSV-2 immunopositivity. In combination with strongly
elevated HSV-2 serum polymerase chain reaction (PCR) levels (106 to 107 HSV-2 copies/ml) a formal diagnosis of HSV-2-positive hepatitis was
established and treatment with ganciclovir was changed to acyclovir. The antibiotic therapy was stopped at this point in time. Due to strong
HSV-positivity of hepatic tissue, tonsillar histologies were re-evaluated for HSV and marked respective immunopositivity was noted (Fig. 1).
Thus, clinical and histological data strongly suggested primary HSV-2 tonsillitis.Table 1Paraclinical presentation at intensive care unit
admission. Reference ranges are indicatedC-reactive protein<5mg/L393Creatinine59–104μmol/L158Aspartate aminotransferase<50U/L3829Alanine
aminotransferase<50U/L2310Gamma-glutamyltransferase<60U/L148Ammonia15–55μmol/L94Bilirubin, total<17μmol/L101Bilirubin
direct<5μmol/L97Glucose4.56–6.38mmol/L8.4Prothrombin time70–130%64Factor
V78–153%45Hemoglobin135–168g/L134Thrombocytes140–380G/L53Leukocytes3.5–10.5G/L1.8Neutrophils1.60–7.40G/L1.66Eosinophils0.02–0.40G/L0.01Basophils0.00–0.15G/L0Monocytes0.20–0.93G/L0.02Lymphocytes1.10–3.50G/L0.09Neutrophil
bands3–18%63.5Segmented neutrophils35–67%29Fig. 1Hepatic (a-c) and tonsillar (d-e) histology. Liver biopsy tissue shows patchy necrosis
comprising 20 to 30 % of the submitted tissue (a hematoxylin and eosin ×100), with nuclear viral inclusions (b hematoxylin and eosin ×400),
immunohistochemically positive for herpes simplex virus-2 antigen (c ×400). Tonsillar tissue examination discloses acute ulcerating
tonsillitis (d hematoxylin and eosin ×100) with patchy positivity for herpes simplex virus-2 antigen in some remnants of surface epithelium
adjacent to the ulcer and in necrotic tissue overlying the ulcer (e ×200). Photomicrographs were taken on a Zeiss Axiophot2 microscope
Paraclinical presentation at intensive care unit admission. Reference ranges are indicated Hepatic (a-c) and tonsillar (d-e) histology.
Liver biopsy tissue shows patchy necrosis comprising 20 to 30 % of the submitted tissue (a hematoxylin and eosin ×100), with nuclear viral
inclusions (b hematoxylin and eosin ×400), immunohistochemically positive for herpes simplex virus-2 antigen (c ×400). Tonsillar tissue
examination discloses acute ulcerating tonsillitis (d hematoxylin and eosin ×100) with patchy positivity for herpes simplex virus-2 antigen
in some remnants of surface epithelium adjacent to the ulcer and in necrotic tissue overlying the ulcer (e ×200). Photomicrographs were
taken on a Zeiss Axiophot2 microscope Along with the development of fulminant ALF, the major clinical concern was progressive multiple organ
failure. Despite initial “rescue”-steroid dosing, high doses of norepinephrine (peak dose of 0.3 μg/kg/minute) were required and progressive
capillary leak was observed. Following a consecutive 48-hour trial of noninvasive ventilation, the patient required invasive mechanical
ventilation as a consequence of progressive muscular exhaustion. He subsequently developed anuric acute renal failure and renal replacement
therapy with intermittent hemodialysis was initiated. Due to deranged coagulation in which his platelet count was 56 G/l, prothrombin time
was 38 %, and international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.82, with recurrent bleeding at the tonsillectomy site and progressive disseminated
intravascular coagulation, an operative revision with ligation of tonsillar arteries was deemed necessary. High urgency liver
transplantation was discussed as a therapeutic option but was refrained from due to persisting uncontrolled infection/multiple organ failure
with an expected badverse outcome. During his course at the ICU, repeated drainage of ascites was necessary. Aspartate aminotransferase
(ASAT) and alanine aminotransferase (ALAT) serum levels peaked at day 3 (ASAT 6126U/l, ALAT 3377U/l), and elevated serum ammonia (123
μmol/l), alkaline phosphatase levels (520 U/l), and total bilirubin levels were noted (Fig. 2). His serum factor V levels were 24 % at their
lowest (following prior infusion of fresh frozen plasma). Continuous norepinephrine application was required for the ensuing 7 weeks due to
severe vasoplegic shock and capillary leak. Extensive sepsis-induced generalized edema was noted and cardiogenic failure was ruled out by
repeated echocardiography. As weaning from mechanical ventilation was complicated by capillary leakage and consecutive volume overload, a
dilative tracheostomy was performed at day 12. In the ensuing days, anuria persisted and continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration was
performed. Repeated cultures of urine, blood, sputum and stool specimens all revealed insignificant microbiological results.Fig. 2Course of
key laboratory parameters used to assess cellular damage and hepatic dysfunction in patient with multiple organ failure. Laboratory indices
at respective days following intensive care unit admission. ALAT alanine aminotransferase, alk. alkaline, ASAT aspartate aminotransferase,
GGT gamma-glutamyltransferase Course of key laboratory parameters used to assess cellular damage and hepatic dysfunction in patient with
multiple organ failure. Laboratory indices at respective days following intensive care unit admission. ALAT alanine aminotransferase, alk.
alkaline, ASAT aspartate aminotransferase, GGT gamma-glutamyltransferase Over the ensuing days, a repeated generalized rash with herpetic
vesicles under continued high-dose acyclovir treatment (initial dose of 2700 mg/day followed by 1500 mg/day for approximately 30 days with
respective adjustment to renal function) was noted (Fig. 3). In the light of a persevering course of HSV-2-induced multiple organ failure
and continued high titers of “viral load” (that is 105 to 106 copies of HSV-2 per ml at days 14 and 21), geno-typization of the HSV-2 virus
for acyclovir resistance was performed which revealed negative results. The patients’ condition finally stabilized after 33 days of
treatment. However, due to persisting lymphopenia and in view of the overall clinical severity, a prophylactic treatment with acyclovir (400
mg defined daily dose) was continued.Fig. 3Eruptions demonstrating generalized herpetic rash at day 8 following intensive care unit
admission (left thigh) Eruptions demonstrating generalized herpetic rash at day 8 following intensive care unit admission (left thigh) After
approximately 1 month of intensive care treatment, an overall stabilization of his condition was noted. Norepinephrine was tapered and
weaning from the ventilator was advanced. A diagnosis of ICU-acquired weakness was established and rehabilitative measures were initiated.
In the light of the available literature, HSV-2-induced multiple organ failure is a rare condition. HSV infection in adults is commonly
associated with cutaneous facial (HSV-1) or urogenital infections (HSV-2) . Of interest, approximately 60 % of the Western population is
HSV-1 colonized, whereas HSV-2 colonization occurs in approximately 12 % of cases . Oral HSV infection in adults may present as severe
pharyngitis accounting for approximately 6 % of cases in young adults. However, HSV-2 seems even scarcer and accounts for approximately <0.5
% of cases . Systemic HSV infection with visceral viral dissemination may often present as ALF due to fulminant hepatic necrosis but
represents less than 1 % of cases of ALF . Due to a lack of specific therapeutic options, HSV hepatitis is associated with mortality rates
of up to 90 % . High-risk populations for a fatal course are immunosuppressed patients and pregnant patients (third trimester). Of interest,
immunocompetency was deemed in approximately 24 % of severely affected patients . In our patient, testing for chronic viral disease
including HIV testing, standard examinations including WBCs (following recovery from lymphopenia), immunoglobulins, distribution of immune
cell subpopulations, and assessment of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II expression human leukocyte antigen- DR (HLA-DR) [8,
9] did not reveal a major immunocompromising condition. Nevertheless, in a case such as in our patient, a potential underlying immune
deficiency should be ruled out. Because of an unspecific clinical presentation, a diagnosis of HSV-induced hepatitis may frequently be
missed and data demonstrate that the majority (that is 58 %) of patients are diagnosed post-mortem . Improved survival rates are reported
following early initiation of antiviral treatment. Retrospective analyses of patients with HSV hepatitis demonstrate significantly lower
mortality rates following early acyclovir treatment when compared to controls (51 % versus 88 %). Treatment delay is associated with higher
need for liver transplantation and higher mortality rates . Thus, early initiation of antiviral therapy may be regarded mandatory to prevent
fatal outcomes. Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) in the context of disseminated HSV infection should be evaluated carefully, as the
risk for HSV recurrence seems increased and lifelong treatment with acyclovir may be needed following OLT . Although there is a lack of
conclusive data, intensivists should consider treating this life-threatening condition with antiviral medication over a sustained period of
time until profound clinical improvement is observed. However, optimal dosage, especially in the presence of acute renal failure, and
optimal timing of treatment for HSV-2-induced multiple organ failure remains elusive. In addition, it should be kept in mind that serum PCR
levels (that is, respective assessment of viral load) may reveal positive results for a sustained period in time. This may be due to
amplification of non-live viral particles and may be misleading in this clinical scenario. In conclusion, this case demonstrates that
HSV-2-induced multiple organ failure may develop in immunocompetent hosts following HSV-2 infectious tonsillitis. The clinical picture may
masquerade as “routine” bacterial septic shock induced by bacterial tonsillitis and may lead to fatal clinical decisions if not recognized
early and treated accordingly. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions UG and JCS collected all data, treated the patient, and drafted the
manuscript. CB and SB performed laboratory investigations/histopathological examinations and provided expert consultation. JFD provided
expert hepatological consultation. JCS coordinated the input of all authors. All authors read and approved the final version of the
manuscript. The authors thank the patient for kindly providing informed consent to the publication of the data. Furthermore, the authors
thank all ICU nurses and laboratory personnel for their dedicated care and efforts. The authors thank PD Dr P. Sendi, Dept. of Infectious
Diseases, Inselspital, Bern, for expert advice/consultations. The authors also thank PD Dr med. S. Zimmerli, Dept. of Infectious Diseases,
Inselspital, Bern, for expert advice/consultations and provision of photographs.
