Figure 1CT scan (mediastinal window settings) showing the reversed halo sign in the right lung (white arrows). Note the reticular pattern
within the halo. Figure 1. CT scan (mediastinal window settings) showing the reversed halo sign in the right lung (white arrows). Note the
reticular pattern within the halo. A 35-year-old man presented to the emergency room with chest pain accompanied by dyspnea. He reported
having sustained a lower limb fracture and having been immobilized for 30 days. A CT scan showed the reversed halo sign (RHS) with a
reticular pattern, and the final diagnosis was pulmonary infarction. The RHS found on HRCT of the chest is defined as a rounded area of
ground-glass attenuation surrounded by a ring of consolidation. This sign was initially described as a sign specific for organizing
pneumonia (OP). Later studies identified the RHS in a wide spectrum of infectious and noninfectious diseases. In Brazil, the most common
infectious causes of the RHS are tuberculosis, paracoccidioidomycosis, and invasive fungal diseases (invasive pulmonary aspergillosis and
mucormycosis). Among the noninfectious causes, OP, both idiopathic and secondary, is the most common. Other important causes are pulmonary
infarction and sarcoidosis. Although the RHS is considered a nonspecific sign, a careful analysis of its morphological characteristics can
narrow the differential diagnosis, helping the attending physician to make a definitive diagnosis. Two imaging patterns should be taken into
account in order to make the diagnosis more specific: the presence of nodules on the wall of or within the halo (nodular RHS); and a
reticular pattern within the halo (reticular RHS). The nodular RHS is generally found in active granulomatous diseases, especially
tuberculosis and sarcoidosis. It is also seen in some cases of paracoccidioidomycosis. Histopathological analysis of such cases has revealed
that the formation of nodules is due to the presence of granulomas. With regard to the reticular RHS, the immunological status of the
patient is the most important piece of clinical information needed in order to make the differential diagnosis. In immunocompromised
patients, the primary diagnostic hypothesis is that of invasive fungal diseases. In immunocompetent patients, the reticular RHS corresponds,
as a rule, to pulmonary infarction, usually secondary to thromboembolic disease. Suspicion of infarction from thromboembolic disease
requires immediate confirmation by determination of D-dimers and CT angiography. It should be borne in mind that the reticular and nodular
patterns are not found in OP, which is the most common cause of the RHS. These considerations are important because the treatment for
infectious conditions is completely different from that used for noninfectious conditions. Corticosteroid use, which is the treatment of
choice for OP, can have harmful effects in patients with invasive fungal disease or active tuberculosis. Although the final diagnosis should
be based on the clinical manifestations, the characteristics of the RHS can be quite useful in making the differential diagnosis. In some
cases, lung biopsy may be necessary for the final diagnosis. Figura 1TC com janela para mediastino evidenciando o sinal do halo invertido no
pulmão direito. Observar que o interior do halo apresenta aspecto reticulado. Homem de 35 anos chega à emergência com quadro de dor torácica
acompanhada de dispneia. Relato de fratura em membro inferior com imobilização por 30 dias. O paciente apresentava o sinal de halo invertido
(SHI) com aspecto reticulado, e o diagnóstico final foi de infarto pulmonar. O SHI observado em TCAR de tórax é definido como uma área
arredondada de opacidade em vidro fosco circundada por um anel de consolidação. Esse sinal foi inicialmente descrito como específico de
pneumonia em organização (PO). Publicações posteriores o identificaram em um amplo espectro de doenças infecciosas e não infecciosas. No
nosso meio, as causas infecciosas mais comuns são a tuberculose, a paracoccidioidomicose e as doenças fúngicas invasivas (aspergilose
pulmonar invasiva e mucormicose). Dentre as causas não infecciosas, a mais comum é a PO, tanto em sua forma idiopática como na forma
secundária. Outras causas importantes são o infarto pulmonar e a sarcoidose. Embora considerado um sinal pouco específico, a cuidadosa
análise de suas características morfológicas pode estreitar o diagnóstico diferencial, ajudando o médico assistente no diagnostico
definitivo. Dois aspectos de imagem devem ser considerados na tentativa de tornar o diagnóstico mais específico: a presença de nódulos
compondo a parede e/ou o interior do halo (SHI nodular), assim como o aspecto reticulado no interior do halo (SHI reticulado). O SHI nodular
é observado basicamente em doenças granulomatosas em atividade, particularmente a tuberculose e a sarcoidose. Eventualmente, é visto também
em casos de paracoccidioidomicose. A análise histopatológica destes casos revelou que a formação de nódulos é devida à presença de
granulomas. Em relação ao SHI reticulado, o estado imunológico do paciente é a informação clínica mais importante para o diagnóstico
diferencial. Em pacientes imunodeficientes, a principal hipótese diagnóstica são as doenças fúngicas invasivas. Em pacientes
imunocompetentes, o achado do SHI reticulado, em regra. corresponde a infarto pulmonar, em geral secundário a doença tromboembólica. No caso
de infarto por doença tromboembólica, a confirmação imediata deve ser obtida através da dosagem de dímero D e de angiotomografia
computadorizada. Deve ser lembrado que esses dois aspectos não são observados na PO, que é a causa mais comum do SHI. Essas considerações
são importantes porque o tratamento dessas condições é completamente diferente. O uso de corticoides, que é o tratamento de escolha da PO,
pode ter efeitos nocivos em pacientes com doença fúngica invasiva ou com tuberculose em atividade. Embora o diagnóstico final deva ser
baseado na correlação com as manifestações clínicas, as características do SHI podem ser bastante úteis no diagnóstico diferencial. Em
alguns casos, a biópsia pulmonar pode ser necessária para o diagnóstico final.
