Osseointegrated implants are a suitable alternative for prosthetic attachment in individuals with a transfemoral amputation, who are unable
to wear a socket. However, the small bone-implant contact area, reduced muscular leverage, and osteoporosis contraindicate osseointegrated
implant use in transfemoral amputees with osteoporosis and a short residuum. We report on the feasibility of combining total hip replacement
(THR) with an osseointegrated implant for prosthetic attachment. We retrospectively reviewed the cases of three transfemoral amputees who
underwent osseointegration with THR between 2013 and 2014. In a two-stage procedure, a custom-made femoral prosthesis was connected to a THR
with a modular revision stem and a stoma was created. Clinical outcomes were assessed at baseline and 1.5–2.5-year follow-up using standard
measures of health-related quality of life, ambulation, and activity levels including the Short Form-36 (SF-36), Questionnaire for
Transfemoral Amputees (Q-TFA), Timed Up and Go test, and 6-min walk test. Patient age ranged from 35 to 65 years. There were no major
adverse events, but there was one case of superficial infection. All patients showed improved Q-TFA and SF-36 scores. Two patients who were
wheelchair-bound at baseline became community ambulators, and the third patient exhibited improved ambulation. This study demonstrated the
feasibility of combining a THR with an osseointegrated implant in transfemoral amputees. Traditionally, transfemoral amputees have been
rehabilitated using a socket prosthesis. However, over the past two decades, innovative surgical techniques that connect the lower limb
prosthesis directly to the bone via osseointegration have emerged. These techniques were developed to overcome reductions in amputee quality
of life, which occur secondary to socket-residuum interface problems including significant discomfort, poor fit, lack of rotational control,
reduced proprioception, and associated energy loss due to prosthetic pistoning . The structural and functional connection between the
macroporous surface of metal implants and living bone is achieved by either bone on-growth (screw fixation implants) or bone penetration and
in-growth (press-fit implants) . Previous studies have reported the benefits of osseointegrated implants in transfemoral amputees. These
included improvements in quality of life , prosthetic use , body image , hip motion range , sitting comfort , donning and doffing ,
osseoperception , and walking ability [13, 14]. Fewer studies have reported on the safety of osseointegrated implants in transfemoral
amputees. Two studies in amputees with screw-type implants reported that superficial infections occurred in half of the study population but
that there was a low risk of deep infection leading to implant removal (<3 %) [5, 15]. A prospective multicentre study in amputees with
press-fit implants reported that there were no implant removals secondary to infection and that the rate of superficial infections was lower
(<30 %), when compared with amputees with screw-type implants . Transfemoral amputees with a short femoral residuum represent a challenge
for rehabilitation, using not only sockets but also osseointegrated implants. In a recent study on prosthetic rehabilitation for amputee
veterans in the USA, the degree of amputation was significantly associated with the prosthetic prescription, with >80 % of the transfemoral
amputees failing to receive a prosthesis in the first year after amputation . The prosthetic function in such patients is severely
compromised because of limited muscle attachment and a small surface area for force distribution . Finding an appropriate socket alignment
and fit can be difficult and could lead to a substantial proportion of patients becoming wheelchair users . The use of osseointegrated
implants for transfemoral amputees with a short residuum presents several challenges. Biomechanical studies have shown that a small bone-
implant contact area decreases the likelihood of a structural union, thereby resulting in an increased risk of aseptic loosening [20, 21].
Furthermore, interface load depends on the degree of amputation; in those with a shorter residuum, there is an abnormal increase in force
moments during normal gait and falling . A recent comparative study indicated that transfemoral amputees had significantly reduced bone
mineral density (BMD) at the hip and femoral residuum, compared with the BMD in the intact contralateral limb . Such osteoporosis increases
the risks of aseptic loosening and fragility fractures of the hip. Likewise, in older amputees with concomitant ipsilateral hip arthritis,
it has been hypothesized that the biomechanical forces could aggravate arthritic symptoms . Therefore, alternative implant concepts are
required to overcome these biomechanical challenges. One innovative idea is to convert the proximal joint to weight sharing rather than
weight bearing by involving it in implant fixation by way of a joint replacement. We recently utilized this concept by combining total knee
replacement with an osseointegrated implant in transtibial amputees who were not eligible for standard osseointegrated implants because of a
short residuum or the presence of knee arthritis . Based on that successful experience, we proposed to develop this concept further and
adapt it for transfemoral amputees with a short femoral residuum. The aim of this paper was to describe the surgical technique and midterm
results of combining a total hip replacement (THR) with an osseointegrated implant for prosthetic rehabilitation in transfemoral amputees.
We retrospectively reviewed the cases of three individuals with transfemoral amputations who underwent an osseointegrated implant combined
with a THR at our centre. Eligible patients included those with short transfemoral amputations (<10 cm) who presented with socket-related
problems and who had arthritis with or without severe osteoporosis (Fig. 1). All patients were treated by the investigators at the
specialized orthopaedic osseointegration clinic. All subjects provided written informed consent.Fig. 1Radiographs of the residual bones for
Case 1, 2 and 3 Radiographs of the residual bones for Case 1, 2 and 3 The two-stage surgical procedure was performed with 5–8 weeks in
between the procedures. An osseointegrated femoral prosthesis was connected to the custom-made THR prosthesis to transfer the load directly
to the pelvis through the acetabulum. This allowed the femoral residuum and hip joint to act as weight-sharing rather than weight-bearing
structures. The implant was designed and customized by the principal investigator (MAM) based on computed tomography scans and radiographs.
Each implant comprised five components (Fig. 2). The first was a hip joint prosthesis consisting of the acetabular cup (SUNFIT TH 69—dual
mobility acetabular cup, Novae® range, SERF, France), which was a cementless titanium shell with an ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene
liner. The second was a 28-mm ceramic head (Biolox Forte). The third was a modified 135° modular proximal body revision hip implant made of
cobalt chrome with a spongiosa coating (Orthodynamics, Lubeck, Germany). The fourth was a custom-made titanium stem with sharp fins placed
proximally and interspersed with plasma spray. This stem allowed connection of the proximal body to the final component that was a standard,
highly polished, dual-cone adaptor coated with niobium oxide.Fig. 2Representation of the shape and dimensions of the total hip replacement
and osseointegration implant for case 3 Representation of the shape and dimensions of the total hip replacement and osseointegration implant
for case 3 The procedure was performed under a spinal anaesthetic, and 2 g of cephazolin antibiotic was administered intravenously
prophylactically. The hip was exposed using the direct anterior approach . An anterior capsulotomy was performed followed by dislocation of
the hip joint to preserve the femoral head. Neck osteotomy was performed using a reciprocating saw, and the femoral head/neck was used as a
structural autograft, adding length to the femoral residuum distally. The acetabulum was prepared by sequential reaming up to bleeding
cancellous bone, which was followed by press-fit implantation of an appropriately sized acetabular shell. The sciatic nerve was identified,
and any associated neuroma was excised. Subsequently, the femoral canal was prepared by gentle broaching. The proximal body revision stem
was then press-fitted in an antegrade fashion. The modular stem was passed through the excised femoral head to add length to the residual
femur. The modular stem was then mechanically connected to the proximal body in a distal position via an opening in the distal femur, and a
trial femoral head prosthesis was inserted. The hip joint was subsequently reduced and taken through a range of motion to assess stability,
and the positions were confirmed using an image intensifier (Fig. 3). This was followed by implantation of the definitive femoral head
implant. The soft tissue was refashioned followed by reorganization of the muscles around the proximal femur that were attached to the
femoral head autograft using intraosseous non-absorbable fibre-wire sutures. The femoral construct was reinforced by Dall-Miles cable
placement around the graft. The subcutaneous tissue was reduced, closing the skin nearest the distal end of the implant, and two drains were
inserted.Fig. 3Examples of intraoperative radiographs for case 3, 3A antero-posterior view, 3B lateral view Examples of intraoperative
radiographs for case 3, 3A antero-posterior view, 3B lateral view A guidewire was inserted distally to identify the centre of the implant
under image intensifier guidance. A stoma was created using a cannulated coring device passed over the guidewire through the skin.
Haemostasis was achieved at the stoma site. A dual-cone adapter was inserted in the distal end of the femoral component and locked in place
using a screw. Wound care involved twice-daily dressing changes using dry ribbon gauze. Sutures were removed 18–21 days after surgery. Once
the wound had granulated, patients were instructed to wash their stoma with soap and warm water and pat dry . The rehabilitation process
commenced on the day after surgery. The Osseointegration Group of Australia Accelerated Protocol was implemented, which was developed using
both the THR and osseointegration fixation guidelines . Non-weight-bearing mobilization, using a forearm support to gradually increasing hip
motion range, and core strengthening exercises were initiated on postoperative day 3. Following the second stage of surgery, a progressive
loading regime was commenced as described previously . Clinical and functional outcomes were measured at baseline and a minimum of 1.5-year
follow-up. Plain radiographs were conducted at baseline, 3 months, 6 months, 12 months, and each year thereafter. At follow-up, the stoma
was monitored for discharge and granulation, and any adverse events were recorded. Functional outcomes were assessed using the physical and
mental components of Short Form 36 (SF-36) health survey and the Questionnaire for Transfemoral Amputees (Q-TFA) [28, 29]. Ambulation
ability was assessed at baseline and at 6 and 12 months using the standard Timed Up and Go (TUG) test and 6-min walk test (6MWT). The
Medicare Functional Classification Level was used to classify mobility, measured as ‘K-levels’, which were graded from K-0 (no ambulatory
ability) to K-4 (active adult) . The differences between follow-up and baseline values were calculated in measurement units and as a
percentage of the baseline value. A Wilcoxon test was used to test for statistically significant differences. A p value of <0.05 was
considered significant. Analyses were conducted using the SPSS statistical software package (Version 22). Patient characteristics are shown
in Table 1. Patients included two females and one male, aged between 35 and 65 years. All patients had a short residuum; case 1 was 7 cm,
case 2 was 9 cm, and case 3 was 3.5 cm. All cases were diagnosed with severe osteoporosis, and cases 2 and 3 had severe hip arthritis. Two
patients were wheelchair-bound, and the other, who had a customized socket, presented with walking difficulties even for short distances due
to a host of socket-interface problems. At baseline, patients presented with significant flexion contractures of the affected hip joint
varying from 15° for case 2, who used a socket prosthesis, to 45° for case 3. All patients complained of phantom limb pain and sensation.
For all cases, stage 1 of the procedure occurred between July 2013 and July 2014. Patient follow-up ranged from 18 to 30 months.Table
1Patient baseline characteristics, amputation information, and rehabilitation timelineCaseDemographicsAmputationRehabilitation
timelineSexAge (years)Height (m)Mass (kg)BMICauseYears since amputationLength (cm) of residuumDays between S1 and S2Months S1 and follow-
up(% SND)1F461.554720Trauma127.118–302M651.758628Tumour198.71758253F351.457536Trauma13.573518 BMI body mass index, m metres, kg kilograms,
SND sound limb Patient baseline characteristics, amputation information, and rehabilitation timeline BMI body mass index, m metres, kg
kilograms, SND sound limb All patients had a pain-free hip and a normal hip motion range at follow-up. The phantom limb sensation was
reduced in all three cases. All patients showed complete healing at the 3-month follow-up (Fig. 4). None of the cases presented with tissue
granulation. One case (case 2) had a single episode of superficial infection that was treated successfully with a week-long course of oral
antibiotics (cephalexin 500 mg). All implants were stable and well-aligned (Fig. 5).Fig. 4Stoma for case 3Fig. 5Radiographs at follow-up for
case 1, 2 and 3 Stoma for case 3 Radiographs at follow-up for case 1, 2 and 3 All patients demonstrated improvement at follow-up for both
the physical (score improvement range, 2–16 points) and mental (score improvement range, 2–40 points) components of the SF-36. All patients
showed improvement in the Q-TFA (score improvement range, 26–42 points), although the difference was not statistically significant
(p = 0.11). All cases had improved mobility. On functional testing, they could cover >200 m in the 6MWT and performed TUG in <15 s
(Table 2).Table 2Health-related quality of life and functional outcomes at baseline and 18–30 months follow-upCaseHealth-related quality of
lifeMobility predictorAmbulation testsSF-36Q-TFA (points)K-levels (K0–K4)TUG (s)6MWT (min)PCS (points)MCS
(points)prepostdiffprepostdiffprepostdiffprepostdiffprepostdiffprepostdiff1264216296940406727033WB12.7–WB206–2435075162114275332311410.5−3.521054033034547263652337542033WB13–WB200–
Diff difference between baseline (preoperative) and follow-up (postoperative), SF-36 Short Form 36 health survey, PCS physical condition
summary, MCS mental condition summary, Q-TFA Questionnaire for Transfemoral Amputees, TUG Timed Up and Go, 6MWT 6-min walk test, WC
wheelchair-bound, SD standard deviation Health-related quality of life and functional outcomes at baseline and 18–30 months follow-up Diff
difference between baseline (preoperative) and follow-up (postoperative), SF-36 Short Form 36 health survey, PCS physical condition summary,
MCS mental condition summary, Q-TFA Questionnaire for Transfemoral Amputees, TUG Timed Up and Go, 6MWT 6-min walk test, WC wheelchair-bound,
SD standard deviation We reported the feasibility of the first three attempts to combine an osseointegrated femoral implant with THR for
prosthetic attachment in transfemoral amputees with a short residuum and concomitant osteoporosis. We are not aware of any alternative
techniques for rehabilitation for this group of patients. In these patients, the prosthetic function is usually poor because of reduced
muscular control, improper alignment of sockets resulting from the small surface area, and compounded socket-skin interface problems [3,
18]. Consequently, the majority of these patients are confined to a wheelchair because of significantly disabling socket-interface problems
when using a standard prosthesis. As is the case for transtibial amputees, a more proximal amputation is not an alternative option because
hindquarter amputation would have a substantially negative effect on patient mobility and quality of life . Existing reports suggest the
efficacy of osseointegrated implants for transfemoral amputees [14, 25, 31]. However, the patient group described here was not considered
candidates for osseointegrated implants because observational data have indicated that the length of the residuum has a significant
influence on the outcome; short residuums were associated with a high risk of failure . The presence of osteoporosis is also a
contraindication, and data on the use of standard techniques in these patients are lacking. This novel concept of combining joint
replacement with osseointegrated implants was based on involving the proximal joint in implant fixation to provide the necessary surface
area for bone-implant contact and subsequent osseointegration. Such an approach allows direct transmission of weight across the joint to the
proximal bone, as we demonstrated recently in transtibial amputees . Therefore, this technique not only overcomes the biomechanical
challenges in these patients but also restores proximal joint motion in those with arthritis. In the present study, all three cases
demonstrated significantly improved functional outcome and mobility. Moreover, the two patients who were confined to a wheelchair before the
surgery regained the ability to walk. To warrant ongoing study of this technique, the clinical benefits observed must outweigh the potential
harms. The concept of a bone-anchored metal implant, which may protrude through the skin, raises serious concerns about the risk of
ascending infection and its related local and systemic implications, more so than that associated with joint replacement. Therefore, careful
soft-tissue management techniques and initial press-fit implantation of the osseointegrated implant are essential to provide a substantial
seal to prevent the ascent of infection. Additionally, in our experience, when compared to the short tibial residuum, THR with
osseointegration in the short proximal femur presents further surgical challenges related to a higher soft-tissue volume, lack of muscle
mass, and low BMD. Therefore, there might be an increased potential for deep infection and subsequent joint infection in this procedure,
which remains our foremost concern. There were no serious adverse events in the present study, although there was one case of superficial
infection that was treated using antibiotics. We have recently completed a multicentre study of 86 patients with transfemoral amputations
who received osseointegrated implants . A minimum 2-year follow-up revealed that 24 patients experienced a superficial infection that did
not require surgery, whereas 5 patients had a deep infection that required soft-tissue debridement. A recent 5-year prospective study
(n = 39) reported a <2 % incidence of deep infection leading to implant removal , whereas another study (n = 51) showed a 50 % cumulative
incidence of superficial infections at a 24-month follow-up . However, surgical closing techniques have been developed by us to minimize the
risk of deep implant-related infection. The present study has limitations such as its small sample size and short follow-up duration.
However, we have developed a database for comprehensive data collection to enable an assessment of procedural risks and benefits and to
identify potential predictors of treatment failure. We envisage that these data might facilitate prospective studies to establish further
evidence-based treatment protocols. Longitudinal studies involving a larger cohort over an extended follow-up period are needed to evaluate
the long-term outcomes of this novel technique. This proof-of-concept study demonstrated the feasibility of this novel surgical technique as
a potential management option for transfemoral amputees with a short residuum and osteoporosis, who are unable to tolerate a conventional
socket prosthesis or a standard osseointegrated implant. It also provides preliminary evidence concerning the safety and functional benefits
of the procedure, but larger prospective studies are essential to establish the safety and effectiveness of the technique. The present study
was conducted at the clinics of A/Prof Munjed Al Muderis at Norwest Private Hospital. The Human Research Ethics Committee at the University
of Notre Dame, Australia, approved this study (Reference number: 014153S). Patient data, including all clinical data and images, were used
after obtaining the patients’ permission. 6-min walk test bone mineral density Questionnaire for Transfemoral Amputees Short Form-36 total
hip replacement Timed Up and Go Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AK
contributed to the ethics, data collection, table and figure preparation, data analysis, and manuscript drafting. CF was involved in the
data collection and manuscript drafting. SL performed the statistical analysis and reviewed the manuscript. BB conducted the data
collection. MAM was the principal surgeon, conceived the study design, and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The authors acknowledge Shona Wilmot and Laith Ibrahim for their assistance with the data collection. None.
