A 40-year-old male presented to the emergency room with a three-month history of cough, fever, and weight loss. Twenty-four hours later, he
also presented sudden hemoptysis. A chest X-ray revealed bilateral non-homogeneous opacities, predominantly in the left lung. Chest CT
showed small nodules scattered throughout both lungs, with cavities in the left lung. We also noted a nodule inside a cavity, with air
interposed between the nodule and the cavity wall-the air crescent sign (ACS)-suggesting an intracavitary fungus ball. The nodule showed
intense enhancement after contrast administration, suggesting a diagnosis of Rasmussen aneurysm (RA; Figure 1). Fiberoptic bronchoscopy
showed active bleeding from the lower left lobar bronchus. Sputum and BAL fluid were positive for AFB, subsequently identified as
Mycobacterium tuberculosis . Treatment with antituberculosis drugs was started, and vascular occlusion with coil embolization was performed
successfully. The patient was discharged from the hospital one month later. Figure 1In A, an axial CT scan with a lung-window setting at the
level of the lower lobes, showing small nodules in both lungs, a consolidation with cavitation in the lingula, and a nodule inside a cavity,
with air interposed between the nodule and the cavity wall (the air crescent sign). In B, an axial CT scan with a mediastinal-window
setting, demonstrating that the nodule is homogeneous. In C and D, axial and coronal reconstructions, respectively, of contrast-enhanced CT
scans, showing intense enhancement of the intracavitary nodule. Hemoptysis in the presence of tuberculosis is frequently due to erosion of
the bronchial artery or of a branch of the pulmonary artery; it can result from numerous conditions, such as bronchiectasis, aspergilloma,
tuberculosis reactivation, scar carcinoma, chronic bronchitis, broncholithiasis, microbial colonization within a cavity, and RA. 1 , 2
Contrast-enhanced CT of the chest and bronchoscopy remain the methods of choice for the evaluation of pulmonary hemorrhage. The ACS is
defined as a crescent-shaped collection of air that separates the wall of a cavity from an inner mass. 3 Although Aspergillus spp. are the
most common cause of the ACS, through the colonization of pre-existing cavities or retraction of infarcted lung in angioinvasive
aspergillosis, this finding has been reported in association with a variety of other conditions, including tuberculosis (blood clot or RA),
hydatid cysts, cavitary lung cancer, bacterial lung abscess with inspissated pus, other fungal or fungal-like conditions
(coccidioidomycosis, actinomycosis, nocardiosis, and candidiasis), and intracavitary hematoma. 3 - 5 Most intracavitary nodules associated
with tuberculosis correspond to aspergillomas (fungus balls caused by Aspergillus spp. colonization). 6 Less common etiologies include blood
clots, cavitary lung cancer, and RA. Aspergilloma results from the fungal colonization of a preexisting pulmonary cavitation, generally
secondary to tuberculosis or sarcoidosis. Although often indolent, with few or no symptoms, the process frequently involves hemoptysis,
which can be fatal. A change in the position of the intracavitary nodule when the patient changes position is a valuable radiological sign
for the diagnosis of aspergilloma. Therefore, the classic CT evaluation of aspergilloma includes supine and prone scans in order to
demonstrate whether the central mass is free or attached to the cavity wall. In contrast to a fungus ball, cavitary lung cancer and RA are
fixed to the cavity wall. Contrast enhancement on CT images of the mass might also help differentiate between aspergilloma and malignancy or
RA. 7 Pulmonary artery pseudoaneurysms secondary to pulmonary tuberculosis are classified as RAs. Progressive weakening of the arterial wall
occurs as granulation tissue replaces the adventitia and media of the artery. The granulation tissue in the vessel wall is then gradually
replaced by fibrin, resulting in the thinning of the arterial wall, pseudoaneurysm formation, and subsequent rupture with hemorrhage. 8 , 9
Hemoptysis is the usual symptom at initial manifestation, and can be life threatening when massive. 8 On contrast-enhanced CT scans, RA can
be identified as a markedly enhanced nodule within the wall of a tuberculous cavity. 10 The first-line treatment for RA is endovascular
embolization. 8 - 10 In conclusion, RA should be included in the differential diagnosis of hemoptysis in patients with tuberculosis
presenting the ACS. Contrast-enhanced CT plays an important role in the evaluation of such patients. Um homem de 40 anos de idade deu
entrada no pronto-socorro apresentando, há três meses, tosse, febre e perda de peso. Vinte e quatro horas depois, apresentou também
hemoptise súbita. A radiografia de tórax revelou opacidades não homogêneas bilaterais, com predomínio no pulmão esquerdo. A TC de tórax
mostrou pequenos nódulos disseminados por ambos os pulmões, com cavidades no pulmão esquerdo. Também foi observado um nódulo dentro de uma
cavidade, com ar interposto entre o nódulo e a parede da cavidade - o sinal do crescente aéreo (SCA) - sugerindo bola fúngica
intracavitária. O nódulo apresentou realce intenso após a administração de contraste, sugerindo o diagnóstico de aneurisma de Rasmussen (AR;
Figura 1). A fibrobroncoscopia mostrou sangramento ativo no brônquio do lobo inferior esquerdo. Escarro e LBA foram positivos para BAAR,
posteriormente identificado como Mycobacterium tuberculosis . Foi iniciado tratamento com tuberculostáticos, e realizou-se oclusão vascular
por embolização com molas, com sucesso. O paciente recebeu alta hospitalar após um mês. Figura 1Em A, imagem de TC axial com janela para o
pulmão, ao nível dos lobos inferiores, mostrando pequenos nódulos em ambos os pulmões, uma consolidação com cavitação na língula e um nódulo
dentro de uma cavidade, com ar interposto entre o nódulo e a parede da cavidade (o sinal do crescente aéreo). Em B, imagem de TC axial com
janela para o mediastino demonstrando que o nódulo é homogêneo. Em C e D, reconstruções axial e coronal, respectivamente, de imagens de TC
com contraste, mostrando realce intenso do nódulo intracavitário. A hemoptise na presença de tuberculose é frequentemente devida à erosão da
artéria brônquica ou de um ramo da artéria pulmonar; pode ser resultante de inúmeras condições, tais como bronquiectasias, aspergiloma,
reativação de tuberculose, carcinoma cicatricial, bronquite crônica, broncolitíase, colonização microbiana dentro de uma cavidade e AR. 1 ,
2 A TC de tórax com contraste e a broncoscopia continuam sendo os métodos de escolha para a avaliação da hemorragia pulmonar. O SCA é
definido como uma coleção de ar em forma de crescente que separa a parede da cavidade de uma massa interna. 3 Embora Aspergillus spp. seja a
causa mais comum do SCA, por meio da colonização de cavidades pré-existentes ou retração do pulmão infartado na aspergilose angioinvasiva,
esse achado já foi descrito em associação com várias outras condições, incluindo tuberculose (coágulo sanguíneo ou AR), cistos hidáticos,
câncer pulmonar cavitário, abscesso pulmonar bacteriano com pus inspissado, outras condições fúngicas ou semelhantes (coccidioidomicose,
actinomicose, nocardiose e candidíase) e hematoma intracavitário. 3 - 5 A maioria dos nódulos intracavitários associados à tuberculose
corresponde a aspergilomas (bolas fúngicas causadas pela colonização por Aspergillus spp.). 6 Etiologias menos comuns incluem coágulos
sanguíneos, câncer pulmonar cavitário e AR. O aspergiloma é resultante da colonização fúngica de uma cavitação pulmonar pré-existente,
geralmente secundária a tuberculose ou sarcoidose. Embora frequentemente indolente, com poucos ou nenhum sintoma, o processo muitas vezes
envolve hemoptise, a qual pode ser fatal. Uma mudança de posição do nódulo intracavitário quando o paciente muda de posição é um sinal
radiológico valioso para o diagnóstico de aspergiloma. Portanto, a avaliação clássica de aspergiloma por TC inclui imagens obtidas em
decúbito dorsal e ventral a fim de se demonstrar se a massa central está solta ou presa à parede da cavidade. Diferentemente da bola
fúngica, câncer pulmonar cavitário e AR estão fixados à parede da cavidade. O realce da massa pelo meio de contraste nas imagens de TC
também pode ajudar na diferenciação entre aspergiloma e malignidade ou AR. 7 Os pseudoaneurismas da artéria pulmonar secundários à
tuberculose pulmonar são classificados como AR. O enfraquecimento progressivo da parede arterial ocorre à medida que tecido de granulação
substitui as túnicas média e adventícia da artéria. O tecido de granulação na parede do vaso é então gradualmente substituído por fibrina,
resultando no afinamento da parede arterial. 8 , 9 A hemoptise é o sintoma habitual na manifestação inicial, e pode ser fatal quando maciça.
8 Em imagens de TC com contraste, o AR pode ser identificado como um nódulo com realce intenso, dentro da parede de uma cavidade
tuberculosa. 10 O tratamento de primeira linha para AR é a embolização endovascular. 8 - 10 Em conclusão, o AR deve ser incluído no
diagnóstico diferencial de hemoptise em pacientes com tuberculose que apresentam o SCA. A TC com contraste desempenha um importante papel na
avaliação desses pacientes.
