Here, we report the cases of three patients diagnosed with extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis and admitted to a referral hospital in
the state of São Paulo, Brazil, showing the clinical and radiological evolution, as well as laboratory test results, over a one-year period.
Treatment was based on the World Health Organization guidelines, with the inclusion of a new proposal for the use of a combination of
antituberculosis drugs (imipenem and linezolid). In the cases studied, we show the challenge of creating an acceptable, effective treatment
regimen including drugs that are more toxic, are more expensive, and are administered for longer periods. We also show that treatment costs
are significantly higher for such patients, which could have an impact on health care systems, even after hospital discharge. We highlight
the fact that in extreme cases, such as those reported here, hospitalization at a referral center seems to be the most effective strategy
for providing appropriate treatment and increasing the chance of cure. In conclusion, health professionals and governments must make every
effort to prevent cases of multidrug-resistant and extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis. The number of cases of multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis (MDR-TB) and extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB) has increased significantly, MDR-TB and XDR-TB having become a
serious public health problem worldwide. Recent data show that the number of cases of MDR-TB tripled between 2009 and 2013. 1 In 2013, cases
of MDR-TB accounted for 3.5% of all new tuberculosis cases and 20.5% of all previously treated tuberculosis cases. Cases of XDR-TB accounted
for 9% of all MDR-TB cases reported in 100 countries. 1 MDR-TB is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains that are resistant to
rifampin and isoniazid, whereas XDR-TB is caused by strains that are also resistant to any fluoroquinolone and at least one of three
injectable second-line drugs (amikacin, kanamycin, and capreomycin). 1 - 3 The increasing recognition of MDR-TB and XDR-TB has led to the
development of new therapeutic strategies combining standard and new antituberculosis drugs. The World Health Organization (WHO) has divided
first-line drugs (which are more effective), second-line drugs (which are less effective, are more toxic, and require longer treatment
duration), and additional drugs for reinforcement (the use of which depends on their efficacy and tolerability) into five groups. 1 , 4 , 5
Table 1 shows the five groups of drugs and the WHO recommendations for their use. Table 1Antituberculosis drug groups proposed by the World
Health Organization and step-by-step recommendations for creating a treatment regimen for patients with multidrug-resistant or extensively
drug-resistant tuberculosis. GroupsDrugsStepsWhat to doDrugs to considerNotes1First-line oral drugs • Isoniazid • Rifampin • Ethambutol •
Pyrazinamide • Rifabutin • Rifapentine1Choose an injectable (group 2) drug on the basis of drug susceptibility test results or patient
history of tuberculosis treatment.amikacin, capreomycin, and kanamycinStreptomycin is not generally used, because MDR-TB is highly resistant
to it.2Injectable drugs • Streptomycin • Kanamycin • Amikacin • Capreomycin2Choose a next-generation fluoroquinolone (group 3).levofloxacin
and moxifloxacinIn case of resistance to levofloxacin, moxifloxacin should be used. Moxifloxacin should be avoided in case bedaquiline is
used.3Fluoroquinolones • Levofloxacin • Moxifloxacin • Gatifloxacin3Add two or more group 4 drugs.cycloserine, terizidone, para-
aminosalicylic acid, ethionamide, and prothionamideEthionamide and prothionamide are the most effective group 4 drugs. Patient history of
tuberculosis treatment, side effects, and cost should be taken into consideration. In general, drug susceptibility testing does not include
group 3 drugs.4Oral second-line drugs • Ethionamide • Prothionamide • Cycloserine • Terizidone • Para-aminosalicylic acid • Sodium
aminosalicylate4Add group 1 drugs.pyrazinamide and ethambutolPyrazinamide is commonly used in most treatment regimens. Ethambutol is used on
the basis of susceptibility test results.5Additional drugs for reinforcement • Linezolid • Ertapenem • Imipenem/cilastatin • Meropenem •
Clarithromycin • Thiacetazone • Amoxicillin/clavulanate • Clofazimine • High-dose isoniazid (has a modest effect) • Bedaquiline •
Delamanid5Consider the possibility of adding group 5 drugs in case it is impossible to use 4 effective group 2-3-4 drugs.bedaquiline,
linezolid, clofazimine, amoxicillin/clavulanate, ertapenem, imipenem/cilastatin + clavulanate, meropenem + clavulanate, high-dose isoniazid,
clarithromycin, and thiacetazoneIf necessary, 2 or more group 5 drugs can be used. It should be noted that there are no standardized
susceptibility tests for group 5 drugs.Adapted from the World Health Organization 1 and Zumla et al. 8 MDR-TB: multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis. Adapted from the World Health Organization 1 and Zumla et al. 8 MDR-TB: multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. A standard or an
individualized approach can be used in order to treat patients with MDR-TB. Official agencies recommend standard treatment regimens on the
basis of health data (e.g., resistance patterns) in a given region. 2 , 3 , 6 In Brazil, the treatment of MDR-TB is standardized by the
National Ministry of Health. 7 The WHO 1 recommends that the treatment of MDR-TB be divided into two phases: the intensive phase and the
maintenance phase. In the intensive phase, which lasts 8 months, at least four potentially effective drugs should be used: an injectable
drug (group 2), a fluoroquinolone (group 3), an oral drug (group 4), and an additional drug for reinforcement (group 5). In the maintenance
phase, the injectable drug is discontinued, and the remaining drugs should be continued for 12 months after a negative sputum culture. 1 , 8
, 9 However, according to some authors, MDR-TB treatment should continue for at least 20 months. Recent studies have shown that continuing
treatment for 18 months after a negative sputum culture prevents treatment failure, recurrence, and mortality. 8 - 11 The treatment of XDR-
TB should be individualized on the basis of patient history of tuberculosis treatment and patterns of resistance to first- and second-line
drugs. 1 , 6 , 8 For patients with XDR-TB, the WHO 1 recommends special precautions: the use of pyrazinamide and/or another group 1 drug;
the use of next-generation quinolones (moxifloxacin or gatifloxacin) even if drug susceptibility test results show resistance to
levofloxacin, ofloxacin, or both; whenever possible, the use of the injectable antituberculosis agent (aminoglycoside or capreomycin) to
which the bacterial sample is susceptible, which should continue for 12 months or even for the duration of the treatment; the use of two or
more group 5 drugs; and the use of all group 4 drugs that have not been extensively prescribed or that are considered effective. The
objective of the present study was to show the 1-year progression of three XDR-TB patients admitted to Hospital Nestor Goulart Reis (HNGR),
which is located in the city of Américo Brasiliense, Brazil, and is a São Paulo State Department of Health referral hospital for the
treatment of MDR-TB and XDR-TB patients requiring hospitalization. Below, we describe the cases of three patients who were admitted to and
treated at our institution. Preadmission treatment regimens and drug susceptibility test results for the three patients (herein identified
as patient 1, patient 2, and patient 3) are presented in Table 2, whereas postadmission treatment regimens, drug susceptibility test
results, body weight, smear microscopy results, results of culture for Koch's bacillus, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive
protein are presented in Table 3. Table 2Treatment setting, duration, regimen, and outcome, as well as drug susceptibility test results, for
the three patients in the present study prior to their admission to Hospital Nestor Goulart Reis , located in the city of Américo
Brasiliense, Brazil. Treatment settingDrug susceptibility testingTreatment duration (from month/year to month/year)Treatment regimen
Treatment outcome RHZESEtOTCvL Patient 1 OutpatientResistance to (R,H,E,S)05/2001-11/2001xxx FailureOutpatientResistance to
(R,H,E,Z,S)01/2003-07/2003 x xxxx NonadherenceOutpatientResistance to (R,H,Z)09/2005-09/2007 x xxxx NonadherenceOutpatientResistance to
(R,H,Z); Susceptibility to (E,S)11/2007-07/2008 x xx x NonadherenceOutpatientResistance to (R,H,E,Z)08/2008-09/2010 x xxxx
NonadherenceOutpatientResistance to (R,H,E,Z,S)06/2011-10/2011 x x x Referral for hospitalization (at Sanatorinhos , in the city of Campos
do Jordão, Brazil)InpatientResistance to (A,C,K,S,E,H,O,Z,R)10/2011-03/2013 xx x xxDisciplinary dischargeInpatient (HNGR)Resistance to
(A,C,S,H,O,Z,R); Susceptibility to (E)03/2013-08/2013 xx x xFailurePatient 2 Outpatient 03/2011-10/2011xxxx FailureOutpatientResistance to
(R,H,Z,O); Susceptibility to (A,K,Cp,S,E)03/2012-10/2013 x x xxFailurePatient 3 Outpatient 01/2006-05/2006xxx
NonadherenceOutpatientResistance to (R,H); Susceptibility to (Z,E,S,Et)06/2006-06/2007xxxx NonadherenceOutpatientResistance to (R,H);
Susceptibility to (Z,E,S,Et)08/2007-07/2009 xxx x CureOutpatientResistance to (R,H); Susceptibility to (Z,E,S)09/2009-04/2010 xx xX
FailureInpatient (at Sanatorinhos , in the city of Campos do Jordão, Brazil)Resistance to (R,H,S); Susceptibility to (Z,E)04/2010-03/2012 x
x xXFailureOutpatientResistance to (R,H,S); Susceptibility to (Z,E)02/2013-02/2014 xx x xxFailureR: rifampin; H: isoniazid; Z: pyrazinamide;
E: ethambutol; S: streptomycin; Et: ethionamide; O: ofloxacin; T: terizidone; C: clofazimine; A: amikacin; L: levofloxacin; K: kanamycin;
Cp: capreomycin; and HNGR: Hospital Nestor Goulart Reis . R: rifampin; H: isoniazid; Z: pyrazinamide; E: ethambutol; S: streptomycin; Et:
ethionamide; O: ofloxacin; T: terizidone; C: clofazimine; A: amikacin; L: levofloxacin; K: kanamycin; Cp: capreomycin; and HNGR: Hospital
Nestor Goulart Reis . Table 3Drug susceptibility test results, treatment regimen, body weight, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR),
C-reactive protein, sputum smear microscopy, and culture for Koch's bacillus over a one-year period for the three patients studied.
PatientDrug susceptibility testingTreatment regimenTreatment durationMonthWeight. kgESR. mm/hCRP. mg/lCultureSputum smear
microscopy1Resistance to (A,Cp,K,S,E, H,O,Z,R)A (Mon-Fri)+M+ E+T+Et+Lz+I+ Clr+Clv09/2013-09/2014Baseline55.002731.6positivenegative
154.15226.7positivenegative 254.3024< 6.0negativenegative 454.8512< 6.0negativenegative 555.6018< 6.0negativenegative 656.0013<
6.0negativenegative 858.5515< 6.0negativenegative 1057.4512< 6.0negativenegative 1258.258< 6.0negativenegative2Resistance to (A,Cp,K,S,H,O,
Z,R); Susceptibility to (E)S (Mon-Fri)+ M+E+T+ Et+Lz+ I+Clr+Clv11/2013-11/2014Baseline59.406636.4positivenegative 258.307<
6.0positivenegative 460.909< 6.0positivenegative 661.95246.2negativenegative 862.5513< 6.0negativenegative 1064.1510< 6.0negativenegative
1264.906< 6.0negativenegative3Resistance to (A,Cp,K,S,H,O,R); Susceptibility to (E.Z)Cp (Mon-Fri)+M+ E+T+ Et+Lz+I+Clr+
Clv+Z03/2014-03/2015Baseline36.308991.0positivepositive 240.751059.1positivenegative 445.601517.4negativenegative
646.102015.7negativenegative 847.801516.1negativenegative 1046.90349.2negativenegative 1246.701136.0negativenegativeCRP: C-reactive protein;
A: amikacin; Cp: capreomycin; Clr: clarithromycin; Clv: clavulanate/amoxicillin; S: streptomycin; E: etambutol; Et: ethionamide; I:
imipenem; H: isoniazid; K: kanamycin; Lz: linezolid; M: moxifloxacin; O: ofloxacin; Z: pyrazinamide; R: rifampin; T: terizidone; and Mon-
Fri: from Monday to Friday. CRP: C-reactive protein; A: amikacin; Cp: capreomycin; Clr: clarithromycin; Clv: clavulanate/amoxicillin; S:
streptomycin; E: etambutol; Et: ethionamide; I: imipenem; H: isoniazid; K: kanamycin; Lz: linezolid; M: moxifloxacin; O: ofloxacin; Z:
pyrazinamide; R: rifampin; T: terizidone; and Mon-Fri: from Monday to Friday. Chest X-rays (Figures 1, 2, and 3 for patients 1, 2, and 3,
respectively), as well as laboratory test results at admission and after 1 year of treatment, can be found in the online supplement of the
JBP (http://www.jornaldepneumologia.com.br/detalhe_anexo.asp?id=43) Click here for additional data file. Click here for additional data
file. A 43-year-old male smoker (with a smoking history of 20 pack-years) presented to our institution. In addition to social drinking, he
reported a history of cocaine use (he had not used it since 2011). He was unofficially employed as a car washer. He had previously been
treated for tuberculosis but had not adhered to the prescribed treatment regimens. According to the patient, this was due to the fact that
he was granted no social security benefit allowances for tuberculosis and had to work during the treatment period. His family income, in
Brazilian reals (R$), was 800.00 (US$ 363.00). He lived in a two-bedroom household with his mother. He was admitted to HNGR on March 18,
2013. Treatment for XDR-TB was initiated on September 6, 2013. A 41-year-old male smoker (with a smoking history of 20 pack-years) presented
to our institution. He was a maintenance assistant. He reported a history of alcohol dependence (he had not consumed any alcohol since 2008)
but no illicit drug use. He had been on sick leave while on treatment for tuberculosis, having been granted a social security benefit
allowance. His family income was R$ 1,400.00 (US$ 437.00). He lived in a single room with his wife, a 1-year-old child, and two teenage
children. He was admitted to HNGR on October 24, 2013. Treatment for XDR-TB was initiated on November 1, 2013. A 25-year-old female smoker
(with a smoking history of 5 pack-years) presented to our institution. She was unofficially employed as a clerk in a bakery. She reported
social drinking but no illicit drug use. Her salary was R$ 725.00 (US$ 327.00). She had previously been treated for tuberculosis but had not
adhered to the prescribed treatment regimens. According to the patient, this was due to the fact that she was granted no social security
benefit allowances for tuberculosis and had to work during the treatment period. She lived in a three-bedroom household with three other
people (a 5-year-old daughter, a brother, and her mother) and slept alone in one of the bedrooms. She had received home oxygen therapy in
the period between December of 2013 and her admission to HNGR. She was hospitalized on February 10, 2014. Treatment for XDR-TB was initiated
on March 10, 2014. In the present study, we reported three cases of XDR-TB patients who had previously been treated for tuberculosis. The
use of a treatment regimen based on the WHO guidelines in association with a new combination of antituberculosis drugs (imipenem and
linezolid) resulted in clinical and bacteriological cure, as well as in significant radiological improvement. To our knowledge, our study is
the first in Latin America and the second in the world to report the use of imipenem for the treatment of patients with XDR-TB, as well as
being the first in the world to report the cases of three XDR-TB patients who were cured with the use of imipenem-linezolid. At HNGR,
treatment is initiated after careful clinical and medication history taking. Smear microscopy is performed at the hospital. Cultures for
Koch's bacillus and drug susceptibility testing are performed at the Adolfo Lutz Institute and repeated every two months. Laboratory tests
are performed at the São Paulo State University School of Pharmaceutical Sciences and repeated every three months. At admission, chest
X-rays and CT scans are taken, the former being repeated every two months. The initial proposal is inpatient treatment for 24 months,
depending on the clinical, bacteriological, and laboratory response. Both MDR-TB and XDR-TB are multifactorial and are caused by one or more
of the following: inappropriate treatment regimens, inadequate drug doses, or inadequate treatment duration; mismanagement of
antituberculosis drugs, affecting supply and quality; laboratories where resolution rates are low; addition of one or more drugs to a
treatment regimen that has failed; treatment discontinuation or irregular medication use; and infection with primary MDR-TB strains. 1 The
chest X-rays taken at admission revealed serious pulmonary sequelae in patients 1 and 3, a finding that might be due to the fact that those
patients had been treated for tuberculosis several times before, albeit erratically and, consequently, ineffectively. Patient 2 had received
a basic treatment regimen under supervision. The fact that the treatment failed might be attributed to primary MDR-TB. Patients 1 and 2
received treatment with nine different drugs, and patient 3 received treatment with ten drugs, in accordance with the WHO guidelines for the
treatment of MDR-TB (Table 1) and XDR-TB, 1 as well as having received drugs that susceptibility test results showed they were sensitive to.
Before their hospitalization, our patients had alternately or inconsistently used group 1 drugs, group 2 drugs, group 3 drugs, and group 4
drugs (Table 2). Patient 1 was the only patient who had used a group 5 drug (clofazimine; Table 2). For patients with XDR-TB, there are few
drug options to create an acceptable and effective treatment regimen. 3 Our three patients received an injectable (group 2) drug and a next-
generation fluoroquinolone (moxifloxacin). Despite relative contraindications in the WHO guidelines, streptomycin was given to patient 2
because the patient had received amikacin under supervision for approximately 20 months before hospital admission and because capreomycin
was unavailable at the time. All patients received group 4 drugs (terizidone and ethionamide) and group 5 drugs (imipenem and linezolid). A
case-control study showed the efficacy and tolerability of the meropenem-clavulanate/linezolid combination in the treatment of patients with
MDR-TB or XDR-TB. 12 A recent study showed the efficacy of ertapenem as an alternative for the treatment (including outpatient treatment) of
MDR-TB. 13 In the present study, clavulanate was used as an adjuvant to imipenem/cilastatin 1 and in combination with amoxicillin, given
that clavulanate is not provided separately. Although the effect of clarithromycin on M . tuberculosis is uncertain, clarithromycin was used
in all three patients because of its synergistic effect with linezolid. 1 , 14 According to the WHO guidelines, 1 ethambutol does not have a
key role in the treatment of MDR-TB, even in cases of patients who are susceptible to it (e.g., patients 2 and 3 in the present study).
Nevertheless, all three patients in the present study received ethambutol. Patient 3 was the only patient who received pyrazinamide, on the
basis of susceptibility test results. After the first year of treatment, the proposed follow-up consisted of maintaining the use of
injectable drugs for 18 months and the use of oral drugs for 24 months (Tables 1 and 3 ). At this writing, patients 1 and 2 had been
discharged as cured, whereas patient 2 had had clinical, radiological, and bacteriological improvement. It is of note that none of the
patients had adverse drug reactions. The pharmacological treatment of XDR-TB is costly. The Brazilian government spent approximately R$
76,000.00 (US$ 30,000) per year on drugs alone for each of the patients included in the present study. A study conducted in South Africa
showed that the treatment of one patient with XDR-TB costs US$ 26,392, which is four times higher than the treatment of one patient with
MDR-TB (US$ 6,772) and 103 times higher than the treatment of one patient with tuberculosis that is susceptible to the basic treatment
regimen (US$ 257). 4 In addition, drug-resistant tuberculosis results in destruction of the lung parenchyma, which has an impact on patient
quality of life and makes it extremely difficult to calculate post-discharge costs for patients and governments. In conclusion, governments
must make every effort to prevent MDR-TB and XDR-TB. In extreme cases, such as those reported here, hospitalization is required in order to
ensure an effective treatment for an adequate period of time. Financial support: None. Study carried out at Hospital Nestor Goulart Reis,
Secretaria de Estado da Saúde do Estado de São Paulo, Américo Brasiliense (SP) Brasil. Relatamos aqui os casos de três pacientes portadores
de tuberculose extensivamente resistente, internados em um hospital de referência no estado de São Paulo, e mostramos sua evolução clínica,
radiológica e laboratorial pelo período de um ano. O tratamento instituído foi baseado nas diretrizes da Organização Mundial da Saúde, com a
inclusão de uma nova proposta de uso de uma associação de drogas antituberculose (linezolida e imipenem). Nos casos estudados, demonstrou-se
o desafio de construir um esquema terapêutico aceitável e eficiente com drogas mais tóxicas, mais dispendiosas e que foram utilizadas por
períodos mais prolongados. Mostramos também o importante acréscimo nos custos do tratamento desses pacientes, com possíveis impactos no
sistema de saúde mesmo após a alta hospitalar. Ressaltamos que, em casos extremos como os apresentados neste estudo, a hospitalização em
centros de referência mostrou-se o caminho mais efetivo para oferecer tratamento adequado com possibilidade de cura. Em conclusão, todos os
esforços dos profissionais da saúde e do poder público devem ser direcionados a evitar casos de tuberculose multirresistente e
extensivamente resistente. O expressivo aumento do número de casos de tuberculose multirresistente (TB-MDR, do inglês multidrug-resistant )
e de tuberculose extensivamente resistente (TB-XDR, do inglês extensively drug-resistant ) torna essas formas da doença um grave problema de
saúde pública mundial. Dados recentes mostram que o número de casos de TB-MDR triplicou entre 2009 e 2013. 1 Em 2013, 3,5% dos casos novos
de tuberculose e 20,5% dos casos previamente tratados foram de TB-MDR. A TB-XDR respondeu por 9% dos casos de TB-MDR notificados em 100
países. 1 A TB-MDR é causada pelo Mycobacterium tuberculosis resistente à rifampicina e à isoniazida, enquanto, na TB-XDR, o bacilo
apresenta resistência adicional a qualquer fluoroquinolona e a pelo menos um dos três medicamentos injetáveis de segunda linha (amicacina,
canamicina ou capreomicina). 1 - 3 O crescente reconhecimento de TB-MDR/XDR provocou o desenvolvimento de novas estratégias terapêuticas
utilizando novas e antigas drogas tuberculostáticas. As drogas de primeira linha (mais efetivas), de segunda linha (menos efetivas, mais
tóxicas, menos eficazes e que demandam um período mais prolongado de tratamento), e as consideradas de reforço (dependendo de sua eficácia e
tolerabilidade) foram agrupadas pela Organização Mundial da Saúde (OMS) em cinco categorias. 1 , 4 , 5 A distribuição dessas drogas em
categorias, assim como a recomendação da OMS para sua utilização, está demonstrada na Tabela 1. Tabela 1Grupos de drogas antituberculosas
propostos pela Organização Mundial de Saúde e a recomendação passo a passo para compor um regime de tratamento para pacientes com
tuberculose multirresistente ou extensivamente resistente.GruposDrogasPassosAçãoDrogas a considerarNotas1Drogas de primeira linha v.o. •
Isoniazida • Rifampicina • Etambutol • Pirazinamida • Rifabutina • Rifapentina1Escolher uma droga injetável (grupo 2) com base no teste de
sensibilidade ou na história minuciosa dos tratamentos prévios.Amicacina, capreomicina, canamicinaA estreptomicina geralmente não é
utilizada pelo alto grau de resistência em pacientes portadores de TB-MDR.2Drogas i.v. • Estreptomicina • Canamicina • Amicacina •
Capreomicina2Escolher uma fluoroquinolona de última geração (grupo 3).Levofloxacina, moxifloxacinaSe houver resistência a levofloxacina,
utilizar moxifloxacina. Evitar o uso de moxifloxacina, se possível, se utilizar bedaquilina.3Fluoroquinolonas • Levofloxacina •
Moxifloxacina • Gatifloxacina3Adicionar duas ou mais drogas do grupo 4.Cicloserina, terizidona, ácido para-aminossalicílico, etionamida,
protionamidaEtionamida/protionamida são consideradas as drogas mais efetivas do grupo 4. Considerar a história dos tratamentos anteriores,
os efeitos colaterais e o custo. O teste de sensibilidade geralmente não é realizado para este grupo de drogas.4Drogas de segunda linha v.o.
• Etionamida • Protionamida • Cicloserina • Terizidona • Ácido para-aminossalicilico • Para-aminossalicilato de sódio4Adicionar drogas do
grupo 1.Pirazinamida, etambutolA pirazinamida é comumente utilizada na maioria dos regimes. O etambutol é utilizado dependendo do teste de
sensibilidade.5Fármacos de reforço • Linezolida • Ertapenem • Imipenem/cilastatina • Meropenem • Claritromicina • Tioacetazona •
Amoxicilina/clavulanato • Clofazimina • Isoniazida em altas doses (ação modesta) • Bedaquilina • Delamanid5Considerar a adição das drogas do
grupo 5 caso não seja possível utilizar 4 drogas efetivas dos grupos 2-3-4.Bedaquilina, linezolida, clofazimina, amoxicilina/clavulanato,
ertapenem, imipenem/cilastatina com clavulanato, meropenem com clavulanato, isoniazida em altas doses, claritromicina, tioacetazonaCaso haja
necessidade de drogas deste grupo, é possível utilizar 2 ou mais drogas considerando que não haja testes de sensibilidade padronizados para
este grupo de medicamentos.Adaptado da Organização Mundial de Saúde(1) e de Zumla et al.(8) TB-MDR: tuberculose multirresistente. Adaptado
da Organização Mundial de Saúde(1) e de Zumla et al.(8) TB-MDR: tuberculose multirresistente. O tratamento para a TB-MDR pode ser
padronizado ou individualizado. Regimes padronizados são sugeridos pelos órgãos oficiais com base nos dados de saúde (por exemplo, padrão de
resistência) de determinada região. 2 , 3 , 6 No Brasil, o tratamento da TB-MDR é padronizado pelo Ministério da Saúde. 7 A OMS 1 recomenda
o tratamento da TB-MDR em duas fases: intensiva e de manutenção. A fase intensiva, com duração de 8 meses, deve incluir no mínimo quatro
drogas potencialmente efetivas: uma droga injetável (grupo 2), uma fluoroquinolona (grupo 3), uma droga oral (grupo 4) e um fármaco de
reforço (grupo 5). Na fase de manutenção, retira-se a droga injetável, e as outras drogas devem ser mantidas por 12 meses após a negativação
da cultura do escarro. 1 , 8 , 9 Entretanto, alguns autores sugerem o tratamento pelo período mínimo de 20 meses. Estudos recentes mostraram
que a fase de manutenção pelo período de 18 meses após a negativação da cultura previne a falência, a recidiva e a mortalidade. 8 - 11 Em
relação à TB-XDR, o tratamento deve ser sempre individualmente delineado com base em uma minuciosa história do tratamento antibacilar e nos
padrões de resistência às drogas de primeira e segunda linha. 1 , 6 , 8 Para estes casos, a OMS 1 propõe cuidados especiais, entre os quais
a utilização de pirazinamida e/ou algum outro fármaco do grupo 1; a utilização de quinolonas de última geração (moxifloxacina ou
gatifloxacina) mesmo se o teste de sensibilidade mostrar resistência a levofloxacina e/ou ofloxacina; o uso do agente injetável
(aminoglicosídeo ou capreomicina) para qual a amostra bacteriológica é sensível, sempre que possível, e sua extensão de uso por 12 meses ou
mesmo por todo o tratamento; a utilização de dois ou mais agentes do grupo 5; e a utilização de todos os agentes do grupo 4 que não foram
prescritos extensivamente nos regimes prévios ou ainda aqueles que forem considerados efetivos. O presente estudo teve como objetivo mostrar
a evolução no período de 1 ano de três pacientes com TB-XDR internados no Hospital Nestor Goulart Reis (HNGR), localizado no município de
Américo Brasiliense (SP), que é um hospital de referência da Secretária de Estado da Saúde do Estado de São Paulo para o tratamento de TB-
MDR/XDR que necessitam internação. Relatamos abaixo os casos de três pacientes que foram internados e tratados na nossa instituição. Os
tratamentos e os testes de sensibilidade anteriores à internação desses três pacientes (identificados como pacientes 1, 2 e 3) são descritos
na Tabela 2, enquanto tratamentos, testes de sensibilidade, evolução do peso corporal e resultados de baciloscopia, cultura para bacilo de
Koch, VHS e proteína C reativa após a internação estão descritos na Tabela 3. Tabela 2Local e regime de tratamento, teste de sensibilidade,
drogas utilizadas e desfechos anteriores à internação no Hospital Nestor Goulart Reis dos três casos relatados.Tipo de regimeTeste de
sensibilidadePeríodo (mês/ano)Regime adotadoDesfechoRHZESEtOTCALPaciente 1AmbRes (R,H,E,S)05/2001-11/2001xxxFalênciaAmbRes
(R,H,E,Z,S)01/2003-07/2003xxxxxAbandonoAmbRes (R,H,Z)09/2005-09/2007xxxxxAbandonoAmbRes (R,H,Z); Sen (E,S)11/2007-07/2008xxxxAbandonoAmbRes
(R,H,E,Z)08/2008-09/2010xxxxxAbandonoAmbRes (R,H,E,Z,S)06/2011-10/2011xxxEncaminhado para internação (Sanatorinhos, Campos do Jordão)HospRes
(A,C,K,S,E,H,O,Z,R)10/2011-03/2013xxxxxAlta disciplinarHosp (HNGR)Res (A,C,S,H,O,Z,R); Sen (E)03/2013-08/2013xxxxFalênciaPaciente
2Amb03/2011-10/2011xxxxFalênciaAmbRes (R,H,Z,O); Sen (A,K,Cp,S,E)03/2012-10/2013xxxxFalênciaPaciente 3Amb01/2006-05/2006xxxAbandonoAmbRes
(R,H); Sen (Z,E,S,Et)06/2006-06/2007xxxxAbandonoAmbRes (R,H); Sen (Z,E,S,Et)08/2007-07/2009xxxxCuraAmbRes (R,H); Sen
(Z,E,S)09/2009-04/2010xxxxFalênciaHosp (Sanatorinhos, Campos do Jordão) ou AmbRes (R,H,S); Sen (Z,E)04/2010-03/2012xxxxFalênciaAmbRes
(R,H,S); Sen (Z,E)02/2013-02/2014xxxxxFalênciaR: rifampicina; H: isoniazida; Z: pirazinamida; E: etambutol; S: estreptomicina; Et:
etionamida; O: ofloxacina; T: terizidona; C: clofazimina; A: amicacina; L: levofloxacina; K: canamicina; Cp: capreomicina; Amb:
ambulatorial; Res: resistente; Sen: sensível; Hosp: hospitalar; e HNGR: Hospital Nestor Goulart Reis. R: rifampicina; H: isoniazida; Z:
pirazinamida; E: etambutol; S: estreptomicina; Et: etionamida; O: ofloxacina; T: terizidona; C: clofazimina; A: amicacina; L: levofloxacina;
K: canamicina; Cp: capreomicina; Amb: ambulatorial; Res: resistente; Sen: sensível; Hosp: hospitalar; e HNGR: Hospital Nestor Goulart Reis.
Tabela 3Resultados de teste de sensibilidade, tratamento realizado, evolução do peso, VHS, proteína C reativa, baciloscopia e cultura para
bacilo de Koch em um ano de tratamento dos três pacientes estudados.PacienteTeste de sensibilidadeTratamentoDuraçãoMêsPeso, kgVHS, mm/hPCR,
mg/lCulturaBaciloscopia1Res (A,Cp,K, S,E,H,O,Z,R)A (2-6 f) +M+E+T+Et+ Lz+I+Clr+Clv09/2013-09/2014Inicial55,002731,6positivanegativa
154,15226,7positivanegativa 254,3024< 6,0negativanegativa 454,8512< 6,0negativanegativa 555,6018< 6,0negativanegativa 656,0013<
6,0negativanegativa 858,5515< 6,0negativanegativa 1057,4512< 6,0negativaNegativa 1258,258< 6,0negativanegativa2Res (A,Cp,K,S,H, O,Z,R); Sen
(E)S (2-6 f) +M+E+T+Et+ Lz+I+Clr+Clv11/2013-11/2014Inicial59,406636,4positivanegativa 258,307< 6,0positivanegativa 460,909<
6,0positivanegativa 661,95246,2negativanegativa 862,5513< 6,0negativanegativa 1064,1510< 6,0negativanegativa 1264,906<
6,0negativanegativa3Res (A,Cp,K,S,H, O,R); Sen (E,Z)Cp (2-6 f) +M+E+T+Et+ Lz+I+Clr+Clv+Z03/2014-03/2015Inicial36,308991,0positivapositiva
240,751059,1positivanegativa 445,601517,4negativanegativa 646,102015,7negativanegativa 847,801516,1negativanegativa
1046,90349,2negativanegativa 1246,701136,0negativanegativaPCR: proteína C reativa; Res: resistente; Sen: sensível; A: amicacina; Cp:
capreomicina; Clr: claritromicina; Clv: clavulanato/amoxicilina; S: estreptomicina; E: etambutol; Et: etionamida; I: imipenem; H:
isoniazida; K: canamicina; Lz: linezolida; M: moxifloxacina; O: ofloxacina; Z: pirazinamida; R: rifampicina; T: terizidona; e 2-6 f:
medicação tomada pelo paciente de segunda à sexta-feira. PCR: proteína C reativa; Res: resistente; Sen: sensível; A: amicacina; Cp:
capreomicina; Clr: claritromicina; Clv: clavulanato/amoxicilina; S: estreptomicina; E: etambutol; Et: etionamida; I: imipenem; H:
isoniazida; K: canamicina; Lz: linezolida; M: moxifloxacina; O: ofloxacina; Z: pirazinamida; R: rifampicina; T: terizidona; e 2-6 f:
medicação tomada pelo paciente de segunda à sexta-feira. As radiografias de tórax (Figuras 1, 2 e 3 em relação aos pacientes 1, 2 e 3,
respectivamente) e os resultados de outros exames laboratoriais na admissão e após 1 ano de tratamento estão disponíveis no suplemento on-
line no site do JBP (http://www.jornaldepneumologia.com.br/detalhe_anexo.asp?id=43). Click here for additional data file. Click here for
additional data file. Homem de 43 anos, tabagista (20 anos-maço), alcoolismo social e usuário de cocaína até 2011. Lavador de veículos, sem
registro. Referia não adesão ao tratamento por não receber auxílio-doença e ser obrigado a trabalhar durante os diversos tratamentos prévios
para tuberculose. Tinha renda familiar de R$ 800,00 (US$ 363,00). Residia em domicilio com dois quartos, onde morava com a mãe. Foi
internado em 18/03/2013. O início do tratamento para TB-XDR ocorreu em 06/09/2013. Homem de 41 anos, tabagista (20 anos-maço), dependente de
álcool até 2008, negava uso de drogas ilícitas e era assistente de manutenção. Esteve em licença médica recebendo auxílio-doença durante os
tratamentos ambulatoriais prévios. Sua renda familiar era de R$ 1.400,00 (US$ 437,00). Residia em domicilio com cômodo único, onde morava
com a esposa, uma criança de 1 ano de idade e dois filhos adolescentes. Foi internado em 24/10/2013. O início do tratamento para TB-XDR
ocorreu em 01/11/2013. Mulher de 25 anos, tabagista (5 anos-maço), etilista social, negava uso de drogas ilícitas e era balconista em uma
padaria. Seu salário era de R$ 725,00 (US$ 327,00), sem registro. Declarava apresentar má adesão ao tratamento por não ter auxílio-doença e
ser obrigada a trabalhar durante os diversos tratamentos anteriores. Residia em domicilio de três quartos com mais três pessoas (uma filha
de 5 anos, um irmão e sua mãe) e dormia sozinha em um dos quartos. Utilizara oxigênio domiciliar entre dezembro de 2013 e a internação no
HNGR. Foi internada em 10/02/2014. O início do tratamento para TB-XDR ocorreu em 10/03/2014. No presente estudo, relatamos três casos graves
de TB-XDR, com diversos tratamentos prévios, demonstrando que a utilização de um regime de drogas baseado nas diretrizes da OMS e com uma
nova proposta de associação de drogas antituberculose (linezolida e imipenem) levou a cura clínica e bacteriológica e importante melhora
radiológica dos pacientes. À luz do nosso conhecimento, este é o primeiro relato de casos na América Latina e o segundo em termos globais
sobre a utilização do imipenem para o tratamento de pacientes portadores de TB-XDR, assim como o primeiro relato a nível mundial sobre a
cura de pacientes TB-XDR com a associação imipenem e linezolida. No HNGR, o tratamento é iniciado após um minucioso levantamento da história
clínica e medicamentosa. A baciloscopia é realizada no próprio hospital. As culturas para bacilo de Koch e os testes de sensibilidade são
realizados no Instituto Adolfo Lutz e repetidos bimestralmente. Os exames laboratoriais são realizados na Faculdade de Ciências
Farmacêuticas da Universidade Estadual Paulista e repetidos trimestralmente. À internação, são realizadas radiografias e TCs de tórax, sendo
as primeiras repetidas bimestralmente. A proposta inicial ao paciente é de tratamento hospitalar por 24 meses, dependendo da resposta
clínica, bacteriológica e laboratorial. A TB-MDR/XDR é multifatorial, podendo ocorrer por um ou mais dos seguintes fatores: administração de
tuberculostáticos feita pelos serviços de saúde com esquemas ou doses inadequadas ou com esquemas por períodos demasiadamente curtos; má
gestão na oferta e na qualidade das drogas; laboratórios com capacidade de resolutividade precária; adição de uma ou mais drogas a um
esquema já falido; pacientes que interrompem e/ou utilizam os medicamentos de forma irregular; e pacientes que adquirem a doença através de
uma cepa primariamente multirresistente. 1 O fato de os pacientes 1 e 3 terem sido submetidos a diversos tratamentos prévios de forma
irregular e, consequentemente, não efetivos, pode ter contribuído para as graves sequelas pulmonares observadas nas radiografias de tórax à
internação. O paciente 2 fez tratamento com um esquema básico, de forma supervisionada, e o desfecho foi falência, o que poderia ser
explicado por uma cepa de TB-MDR primária. Utilizamos nove drogas diferentes para o tratamento dos pacientes 1 e 2 e dez drogas para o
paciente 3, em acordo com a orientação da OMS para o tratamento de TB-MDR (Tabela 1) e as orientações especiais da mesma para a TB-XDR, 1
além de fármacos aos quais as cepas encontradas se mostraram sensíveis no teste de sensibilidade. Os pacientes utilizaram, previamente à
internação e de forma alternada e/ou inconsistente, drogas dos grupos 1 a 4 (Tabela 2). Somente o paciente 1 utilizou uma droga do grupo 5
(clofazimina; Tabela 2). Quando tratamos pacientes portadores de TB-XDR, há poucas alternativas medicamentosas para construir um regime de
tratamento aceitável e eficiente. 3 Utilizamos para os três pacientes uma droga injetável (grupo 2) e uma fluoroquinolona de ultima geração
(moxifloxacina). Apesar da contraindicação relativa da OMS, optou-se pelo uso da estreptomicina no paciente 2, considerando que o mesmo já
havia utilizado a amicacina sob supervisão por aproximadamente 20 meses antes da internação e que não havia disponibilidade de capreomicina
na época. Todos receberam as drogas dos grupos 4 (terizidona e etionamida) e 5 (imipenem e linezolida). Um estudo caso-controle prévio
mostrou a efetividade e a tolerabilidade da associação meropenem+clavulanato/linezolida no tratamento de pacientes com TB-MDR/XDR. 12 Um
estudo recente mostrou a efetividade do ertapenem como alternativa para esse tratamento mesmo ambulatoriamente. 13 Associamos o clavulanato
como um agente adjuvante ao imipenem/cilastatina 1 e sempre associado à amoxicilina, considerando que o mesmo não é disponibilizado
isoladamente. A claritromicina, apesar de sua atividade incerta sobre o M. tuberculosis , foi utilizada em todos os pacientes pelo seu
efeito sinérgico à efetividade da linezolida. 1 , 14 Utilizamos o etambutol em todos os pacientes, inclusive no paciente 1, apesar de a OMS
1 não considerar essa droga como um fármaco-chave nos regimes terapêuticos para TB-MDR, mesmo quando existe sensibilidade à droga (pacientes
2 e 3). Optamos pelo uso da pirazinamida somente para o paciente 3, em acordo com o teste de sensibilidade. A proposta de seguimento após o
primeiro ano foi para manter as medicações injetáveis por 18 meses e as orais por 24 meses (Tabelas 1 e 3 ). Até o momento, os pacientes 1 e
2 tiveram alta por cura, e o paciente 3 mantém melhora clínica, radiológica e bacteriológica. Cabe ressaltar que nenhum paciente apresentou
quaisquer efeitos adversos às medicações utilizadas. O custo da terapêutica medicamentosa para pacientes com TB-XDR traz um grande impacto
financeiro. O valor anual despendido pelo poder público somente com medicamentos para cada paciente incluído no presente estudo foi de,
aproximadamente, R$ 76.000,00 (US$ 30.000). Um estudo realizado na África do Sul mostrou que o tratamento de um paciente portador de TB-XDR
tem um custo de US$ 26.392, quatro vezes maior que o do tratamento de um paciente portador de TB-MDR (US$ 6.772) e 103 vezes maior que o de
um paciente portador de tuberculose sensível ao esquema básico (US$ 257). 4 Além disso, temos de considerar a grande destruição do
parênquima pulmonar, que não somente impacta a qualidade de vida do paciente, mas torna extremamente difícil o cálculo dos custos
posteriores à alta hospitalar, tanto para o paciente como para o poder público. Em conclusão, são necessários todos os esforços do poder
público no sentido de evitar a TB-MDR/XDR. Em casos extremos como os apresentados no presente estudo, é necessário considerar a internação
para garantir um tratamento efetivo por um período de tempo adequado. Apoio financeiro: Nenhum. Trabalho realizado no Hospital Nestor
Goulart Reis, Secretaria de Estado da Saúde do Estado de São Paulo, Américo Brasiliense (SP) Brasil.
