Therapeutic hypothermia or targeted temperature management has been used after cardiac arrest to improve neurological outcomes and
mortality. However, a side effect of temperature modulation is a centrally mediated shivering response. The Columbia Anti-Shivering Protocol
sets up a systematic method of intravenous (IV) and oral medication escalation to suppress this response and preserve the benefits of this
therapy. We present the case of a 59-year-old male who began shivering after therapeutic hypothermia for cardiac arrest, leading to a
persistent rise in core temperature despite adequate sedation. He was also found to have gastric contents similar to coffee grounds through
nasogastric tube suction. The shivering was effectively suppressed and the rising core temperature plateaued using rectal acetaminophen and
buspirone administered by means of a novel device, the Macy Catheter. Also, when used in conjunction with other protocol-driven medications,
the patient was able to achieve a core temperature of 33°C. The Macy Catheter appears to be a useful approach to rectally administer
buspirone and acetaminophen, using an easy-to-place, nonsterile atraumatic device that requires no radiographic confirmation of placement.
Hospitals are treating an increasing number of cardiac arrest patients after return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) with therapeutic
hypothermia or targeted temperature management (TTM). Multiple studies have shown benefits of this approach such as improved neurological
outcomes and decreased mortality (Bernard et al., 2002; HACA, 2002; Arrich et al., 2009; Nielsen et al., 2014). One of the common
complications of temperature reduction during TTM is the shivering response. Shivering is a centrally mediated response, which has the
potential to reverse many of the theoretical benefits of the cooling. The detriments of shivering include increased extracranial oxygen
consumption and blood flow, ultimately depriving the brain of the benefits the cooling was meant to provide. In 2011, the Columbia Anti-
Shivering Protocol (Table 1) was published to provide guidance on the stepwise pharmacological suppression of this shivering response, with
the aim to decrease the need for prolonged sedation and unnecessarily lengthy ICU stays (Choi et al., 2011). Comparison of the Advocate
Christ Medical Center Therapeutic Hypothermia Protocol Followed in the Treatment of This Patient to the Columbia Anti-Shivering Protocol
Choi et al., 2011. BSAS, Bedside Shivering Assessment Scale; PO, per os; PRN, pro re nata; IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; GFR,
glomerular filtration rate; BIS, bispectral index. Although effective, the first-stage medications utilized in this protocol are not
generally available in intravenous formulation. A new rectal administration device, the Macy Catheter (Hospi Corp.), has recently become
available, offering an easy route to quickly provide first-stage antishivering medications such as acetaminophen and buspirone even before
placement of nasogastric (NG) or orogastric (OG) tubes (Lyons et al., 2015). In cases in which an NG or OG tube cannot be placed, or
contraindications to NG/OG tube medication administration (such as upper gastrointestinal bleeding or a need for continuous suction) exist,
the Macy Catheter may offer the only practical method of administration. We present the case of a 59-year-old male brought into the
emergency department (ED) as a full cardiac arrest outside of the hospital. The patient had ROSC in the ED after multiple rounds of
epinephrine and defibrillation. After this, the patient was intubated and placed in an Arctic Sun Cooling System to institute therapeutic
hypothermia at 33°C. Temperature feedback was monitored with a continuous bladder thermometer, and his treatment followed the Advocate
Christ Medical Center Therapeutic Hypothermia Protocol (Table 1), which closely resembles the Columbia Anti-Shivering Protocol. An NG tube
was also placed to suction, which revealed the gastric contents to be similar in appearance to coffee grounds without a clear etiology. In
addition, a fecal occult blood test was performed and found to be positive. The source of the bleeding was felt to be GI in nature rather
than secondary to a traumatic airway placement. In accordance with the hypothermia protocol, the patient was initially sedated on fentanyl
with a core temperature of 36.5°C (Fig. 1). Despite the addition of midazolam and a later increased dose of the midazolam drip, the
patient's core temperature continued to rise. After about 4 hours with the Arctic Sun Cooling System set to 33°C and despite adequate doses
of sedation, the patient's core temperature curve demonstrated a steady upslope, and the patient began to shiver. In accordance with the
hypothermia protocol (Table 1), a step 0 baseline medication administration was initiated to control the shivering. The initial medications
selected included liquid acetaminophen 650 mg and buspirone 30 mg. Due to the evidence of upper GI bleeding, these medications were
administered rectally using a Macy Catheter. In addition, aspirin 325 mg was administered rectally for its antiplatelet effect, the benefits
of which were felt to outweigh risks (e.g., antiprostaglandin effects on the stomach) based on the patient's elevated troponin. Patient's
core body temperature after return of spontaneous circulation and placement of Arctic Sun Cooling System set to 33°C with subsequent anti-
shivering interventions noted directly on the graph. IV, intravenous. The Macy Catheter used is a thin silicone tube, 14F in diameter, with
a 15 mL balloon at the tip that is sized to allow secure retention in the rectum, yet allow for easy passage in the event of defecation.
Placement does not require any sterile technique. Multiple exit ports exist at the distal catheter tip for fluid and medication passage, and
an internal one-way check valve is present in the proximal administration port to prevent backflow of fluids. The buspirone was crushed
using the pill crusher supplied with the Macy Catheter kit, mixed with normal tap water, and administered alongside the acetaminophen and
aspirin. Subsequently, the Macy Catheter was flushed with normal tap water. Shortly after the administration of these medications, the
patient's previously rising core temperature effectively plateaued at 36.9°C and he clinically stopped shivering. Further acceleration in
temperature reduction was then achieved in accordance with the hypothermia protocol (Table 1) by switching sedation agents to a low-dose
propofol drip, then administering meperidine 25 mg IV push, and later use of magnesium 2 g IV (Fig. 1). Absorption of fluids and medications
by the rectal mucosa is well described, and has a long history of use, dating back to at least the early 1900s (Murphy, 1909; Trout, 1912;
Nabil et al., 1982; Bruera et al., 1994; Needham, 1995; Zweig et al., 2006; Fouad et al., 2010; Pasero, 2010; Chiang et al., 2011). Because
no sterility, complex training, or follow-up X-ray confirmation is required, this approach has also been utilized in both emergent and
remote settings (Tremayne, 2010). Practical use of this route has likely been limited by the lack of a simple, effective means of
administration and catheter retention, which has been addressed now by the Macy Catheter. There are no previous studies or guidelines on the
rectal administration of buspirone for shivering suppression after therapeutic hypothermia. Buspirone is a 5-HT agonist that has been used
effectively to suppress shivering secondary to therapeutic hypothermia, by lowering the shivering threshold without providing overt sedation
and paralysis. Acetaminophen acts through a centrally mediated prostaglandin inhibition to decrease the hypothalamic temperature set point
(Choi et al., 2011). Buspirone is typically administered orally or using the NG/OG tube, however, given the presence of GI bleeding in this
case, this method of administration was felt to be unadvisable. Buspirone has an extensive first-pass metabolism through hepatic oxidation
when taken orally, with a mean systemic availability of about 4% and the main metabolite, 1-pyrimidinylpiperazine, at most 25% as potent as
buspirone (Gammans et al., 1986). Research on the pharmacokinetics of rectal buspirone is limited; however, the avoidance of the first-pass
metabolism may increase the serum concentration over the expected range when compared with oral administration. Clinically, the rectal
administration through the Macy Catheter of the combined acetaminophen and buspirone effectively stopped the patient's shivering and
plateaued his previously rising core temperature. This combined with other hypothermia protocol-driven medications led to a sustained and
continuous decline in the patient's core temperature. This novel method of medication administration using the Macy Catheter has the
potential to change current practices. The large first-pass hepatic metabolism of buspirone may initially be avoided as a result of rectal
administration. This may allow for less escalation of protocol-driven shivering suppression leading to quicker hypothermia induction and
fewer sedating agents used. Further research into this matter is needed. This method also has the ability to ease medication administration
issues (e.g., nausea and emesis) in patients with difficulty taking oral medications, a common problem in patients suffering from acute
coronary syndrome. Limitations in this case report include the concurrent administration of acetaminophen and aspirin alongside the
buspirone, which may alone have been enough to cause the cessation of shivering. Shivering was assessed clinically and thought to be the
only reason delaying the patient's achievement of goal temperature. We did not perform pharmacokinetic measurements of the medications
administered and relied solely on clinical response to guide our treatment plans. In summary, rectal administration of buspirone and
acetaminophen through a new medical device, the Macy Catheter, was effective and offered an easy to use first-line method of shivering
suppression in the setting of therapeutic hypothermia. No competing financial interests exist.
