Molecular profiling has uncovered genetic subtypes of glioblastoma (GBM), including tumors with IDH1 mutations that confer increase survival
and improved response to standard-of-care therapies. By mapping the genetic landscape of brain tumors in routine clinical practice, we
enable rapid identification of targetable genetic alterations. A 29-year-old male presented with new onset seizures prompting neuroimaging
studies, which revealed an enhancing 5 cm intra-axial lesion involving the right parietal lobe. He underwent a subtotal resection and
pathologic examination revealed glioblastoma with mitoses, microvascular proliferation and necrosis. Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis
showed diffuse expression of GFAP, OLIG2 and SOX2 consistent with a tumor of glial lineage. Tumor cells were positive for IDH1(R132H) and
negative for ATRX. Clinical targeted-exome sequencing (DFBWCC Oncopanel) identified multiple functional variants including IDH1 (p.R132H),
TP53 (p.Y126_splice), ATRX (p.R1302fs*), HNF1A (p.R263H) and NF1 (p.H2592del) variants and a NAB2-STAT6 gene fusion event involving NAB2
exon 3 and STAT6 exon 18. Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) further revealed a focal amplification of NAB2 and STAT6. IHC
analysis demonstrated strong heterogenous STAT6 nuclear localization (in 20 % of tumor cells). While NAB2:STAT6 fusions are common in
solitary fibrous tumors (SFT), we report this event for the first time in a newly diagnosed, secondary-type GBM or any other non-SFT. Our
study further highlights the value of comprehensive genomic analyses in identifying patient-specific targetable mutations and
rearrangements. Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common, primary malignant brain tumor of adults with a median survival of 15 months despite
multimodal surgical, chemo and radiotherapy . GBMs are characterized by infiltrating tumor cells with nuclear pleomorphism, mitotic activity
and accompanying necrosis and/or endothelial proliferation. More recently, molecular profiling has uncovered genetic subtypes among
histologically indistinguishable GBMs that confer increased survival and improved response to standard-of-care therapies. For example,
tumors with isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH1/2) mutations show prolonged survival while tumors with MGMT promoter methylation benefit from
temozolomide therapy [2, 3]. Despite inclusion of clinically relevant molecular events in routine diagnostic evaluation of brain tumors,
molecular testing has largely remained limited to a small number of genetic alterations linked to specific tumor subtypes (e.g., 1p/19q co-
deletion in oligodendrogliomas). Such focused interrogation strategies however ignore the genetic heterogeneity of cancer and prevent
screening for less common, yet clinically actionable, genetic events. Indeed, assessment of IDH1 mutation status by immunochemistry only
identifies the most common IDH1 R132H alteration, while other less frequent, yet prognostically important IDH1/2 are not assessed.
Furthermore, other rare genetic changes that are potentially therapeutically actionable, such as BRAF (p.V600E) mutations, are not routinely
profiled in high-grade gliomas . Comprehensive genomic analysis of brain tumors provides objective companion data to support and refine
histologic diagnoses . Furthermore, by mapping the genetic landscape of brain tumors in routine clinical practice, we enable rapid
identification of targetable genetic alterations and support patient enrollment onto molecularly stratified clinical trials. A previously
healthy 29-year-old male presented to an outside hospital with a symptomatic intra-axial enhancing right parietal brain lesion necessitating
surgical management and adjuvant temozolomide (Fig. 1a, b). Histology showed a densely cellular infiltrating glial neoplasm comprised of
severely atypical cells with mitoses, vascular proliferation and necrosis consistent with GBM (Fig. 1c). Immunohistochemistry demonstrates
tumor cells were positive for GFAP, OLIG2, SOX2, IDH1(R132H) and a MIB1 proliferation index of >30 % (Fig. 1c). MGMT methylation testing
revealed that the tumor was positive for promoter methylation.Fig. 1 a Coronal T2 FLAIR highlights the intra-parenchymal location of the
complex tumor resection bed and associated edema. b Axial post contrast T1 MRI showing peripheral ring enhancement and progression from
previous post-surgical imaging (right). c H&E sections showing a hypercellular fibrillary neoplasm with morphological atypia, mitoses, and
endothelial proliferation. Necrosis was also present (not shown). The tumor showed diffuse expression of the glial markers Olig2, Sox2 and
GFAP. Immunoreactivity with antibody against the R132H IDH1 mutation. ATRX immunostaining highlighting loss within the tumor and normal
retained expression in a adjacent vessel. Immunohistochemistry with the STAT6 antibody showing strong nuclear expression in 15–20 % of tumor
nuclei (inset) consistent with previous described function of NAB2-STAT6 fusion event. d Schematic demonstrating the locations of common
NAB2-STAT6 rearrangements in solitary fibrous tumor (SFTs), the presented case GBM and other STAT6 rearrangements reported in GBMs a Coronal
T2 FLAIR highlights the intra-parenchymal location of the complex tumor resection bed and associated edema. b Axial post contrast T1 MRI
showing peripheral ring enhancement and progression from previous post-surgical imaging (right). c H&E sections showing a hypercellular
fibrillary neoplasm with morphological atypia, mitoses, and endothelial proliferation. Necrosis was also present (not shown). The tumor
showed diffuse expression of the glial markers Olig2, Sox2 and GFAP. Immunoreactivity with antibody against the R132H IDH1 mutation. ATRX
immunostaining highlighting loss within the tumor and normal retained expression in a adjacent vessel. Immunohistochemistry with the STAT6
antibody showing strong nuclear expression in 15–20 % of tumor nuclei (inset) consistent with previous described function of NAB2-STAT6
fusion event. d Schematic demonstrating the locations of common NAB2-STAT6 rearrangements in solitary fibrous tumor (SFTs), the presented
case GBM and other STAT6 rearrangements reported in GBMs Targeted exome sequencing (OncoPanel) of 300 cancer-associated genes and 113
introns from 35 genes for rearrangement was performed on DNA extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tumor tissue [6, 7]. OncoPanel
revealed IDH1 (p.R132H), TP53 (p.Y126_splice), ATRX (p.R1302fs*), HNF1A (p.R263H) and NF1 (p.H2592del) variants, several variants of unknown
significance, and a NAB2-STAT6 fusion involving exon 3 of NAB2 and exon 18 of STAT6 (Fig. 1d, Table 1). This rearrangement has not
previously been reported outside the context of solitary fibrous tumors (SFTs). In SFTs, fusion products are variable, but typically involve
exons 6/7 of NAB2 and exons 17/18 of STAT6 (Fig. 1d). Similar to the functional consequence of this fusion product in SFTs, we confirmed
that this novel NAB2-STAT6 fusion detected in our GBM patient resulted in strong STAT6 nuclear localization (Santa Cruz, catalog #sc-621),
however this was present in only a subpopulation of cells (Fig. 1c).Table 1Mutations identified in GBM patient by targeted exome sequencing
(OncoPanel)Gene SymbolProtein ChangeAllelic Fraction IDH1 p.R132H 0.50 TP53 p.Y126_splice 0.85 ATRX p.R1302fs 0.46 HNF1A p.R263H 0.16 NF1
p.H2592del 0.38 GLI1 p.G798R 0.73 MLH1 p.R389Q 0.46 MLL2 p.Q4557_splice 0.36 Mutations identified in GBM patient by targeted exome
sequencing (OncoPanel) To determine whether this event might be recurrent in gliomas, and given multiple genomic alterations detected in
this tumor closely resemble those found in adult low-grade gliomas (ALGGs) (mutations in IDH1, TP53 and ATRX) , we investigated the
frequency of NAB2-STAT6 fusions in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) low-grade glioma database (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/). This analysis
included 50 tumors with whole genome sequencing (WGS) and 311 tumors with whole exome sequences (WES). Among this 361 patient cohort, we did
not detect any evidence of NAB2-STAT6 fusions, nor fusion events involving NAB2 or STAT6 with other fusion partners. We next analyzed TCGA
adult GBM datasets including 42 and 164 tumors tested by WGS and RNA sequencing, respectively. Similar to our findings among ALGGs, we did
not detect NAB2-STAT6 fusions but did identify two unique STAT6 fusion events STAT6-CPM and HIPK2-STAT6 and each co-amplified with oncogenes
CDK4 and MDM2 in the amplicon on chromosome 12q13-15. These observations suggest that STAT6 fusions occur at a low frequency but may be
recurrent with other 12q13-15 amplification events. Given this finding, we performed genome wide array comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH), or copy number analysis, of our case study GBM and also identified co-amplification of NAB2, STAT6 and CDK4 involving a 12q3-14
amplicon of 0.6 Mb (Table 2).Table 2aCGH copy number alterations identified in GBM patient Gene/Region Chromosome Band Copy Number Change
Nucleotides (GRCh37//hg19) MYCL1 1p34.2 -- -- CDKN2C 1p33 -- -- PIK3C2B 1q32.1 -- MDM4 1q32.1 -- -- AKT3 1q44 -- MYCN 2p24.3 -- -- PIK3CA
3q26.32 -- SOX2 3q26.33 -- -- FGFR3 4p16.3 -- PDGFRA 4q12 550 kb focal gain chr4:55,072,465–55,622,596 TERT 5p15.33 -- MYB 6q23.3 -- --
PARK2 6q26 -- QKI 6q26 -- -- EGFR 7p11.2 -- EGFRvIII 7p11.2 -- -- CDK6 7q21.2 -- MET 7q31.2 -- -- BRAF 7q34 -- FGFR1 8p11 23-p11.22 -- --
MYBL1 8q13.1 -- MYC 8q24.21 -- -- CDKN2A 9p21.3 38.5 Mb single copy gain chr9:204,104–38,731,432 NTRK2 9q21.32-q21.33 1.3 Mb focal gain
chr9:86,840,129–88,134,100 NTRK2 9q21.32-q21.33 159 kb intragenic amplification chr9:87,344,078–87,503,027 PTEN 10q23.31 82.6 Mb single copy
loss chr10:52,805,936–135,435,714 FGFR2 10q26.13 82.6 Mb single copy loss chr10:52,805,936–135,435,714 CCND2 12p13.32 34.6 Mb single copy
loss chr12:163,593–34,756,209 NAB2 12q13.3 37 kb amplification chr12:57,484,461 –57,521,151 STAT6 12q13.3 37 kb amplification
chr12:57,484,461 –57,521,151 CDK4 12q14.1 131 kb amplification chr12:58,034,214–58,165,540 MDM2 12q15 95.3 Mb single copy loss
chr12:38,448,667–133,779,076 RB1 13q14.2 Single copy loss via monosomy 13 chr13:19,296,544–115,105,297 TP53 17p13.1 19.5 Mb single copy loss
chr17:47,546–19,536,368 NF1 17q11.2 -- SMARCB1/INI1 22q11.23 Single copy loss via monosomy 22 chr22:16,133,474–51,219,009 NF2 22q12.2 Single
copy loss via monosomy 22 chr22:16,133,474–51,219,009 1p- n/a -- -- 4p- n/a -- Monosomy 6 n/a -- 6q- n/a -- Polysomy 7 n/a -- 7p- n/a --
Monosomy 10 n/a -- 10q- n/a 82.6 Mb single copy loss chr10:52,805,936–135,435,714 11p- n/a -- -- Monosomy 14 n/a -- idic(17p11.2) n/a --
18q- n/a -- 19q- n/a -- Monosomy 22 n/a Detected chr22:16,133,474–51,219,009 aCGH copy number alterations identified in GBM patient
Incorporating molecular analyses into current diagnostic pipelines for GBM patients may provide an avenue for identifying novel aberrations
or events that have been previously reported in other tumor types . One study reported that such a genome wide screening strategy can in
fact yield candidate actionable genetic alterations in every case analysed . Here we demonstrate that targeted-exome sequencing of a GBM
revealed a NAB2-STAT6 fusion, which is a known oncogenic driver in SFTs but has not been reported in other cancers. In SFTs, the novel
fusion product results in nuclear translocation of the STAT6 transcriptional activating domain and activation of the early growth response
(EGR1) pathway leading to tumorigensis [8, 11]. The strong nuclear STAT6 staining in a subpopulation of GBM cells parallels what is found in
SFTs, suggesting a similar mechanism of action. Given its high frequency in SFTs, the NAB2-STAT6 fusion has raised interest as both a
diagnostic and potentially druggable therapeutic target . Although the frequency of this event has not been fully explored, our results from
querying TCGA ALGG and GBM datasets demonstrates that specific NAB2-STAT6 fusion events are rare in gliomas but that STAT6 fusions are
recurrent events with several partners in adult GBM. Despite the low recurrence frequency, this fusion supports repurposing drugs developed
against the NAB2-STAT6 or the EGR pathway in SFTs as a potential alternative or adjuvant therapy for patients with genetically similar
gliomas. Interestingly, similar to other STAT6 rearrangement events in GBMs, we noted CDK4 amplification in this patient. Chromosome 12 is
frequently subject to a storm of amplification/rearrangement events in GBMs, including CDK4, MDM2, and HMGA2 amplifications as well as other
regions (including KRAS). These events suggest a more complex rearrangement involving much of the chromosome and are reminiscent of ring
chromosomes found in dedifferentiated liposarcomas . Given the genetic proximity of CDK4 and MDM2 to STAT6 and NAB2 in the chromosomal
region 12q13-15, the fusion product may represent a consequence of this more complex rearrangement. Understanding the precise functional
consequences of this molecular alteration in glioma biology will be important to guiding future therapies of similar cases . As genome wide
sequencing strategies become more widely available in the clinical setting, infrequent mutations and/or rare fusion events may collectively
represent a brain tumor patient population that can be managed with targeted therapies approved for use in other tumor types. This strategy
may pave the way for improving outcomes in a small subset of GBM patients. Written informed consent was obtained for 10–417 and 11–104
(OncoPanel) from the patient for sequencing analysis, publication of this report and accompanying images. array comparative genomic
hybridization adult low grade glioma early growth response glioblastoma solitary fibrous tumor the cancer genome atlas Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions PD, RYH, PYW contributed clinical, oncology and radiology
data, generated figures and provided written text for the manuscript. PD, RDF, KLL, SHR performed pathologic analysis and initiated targeted
exome sequencing. AHL, RDF, KLL, SHR were responsible for the array CGH and sequencing analyses. RFL and RB analyzed TCGA datasets and
contributed content to the written text. PD and SHR wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
