The differential diagnosis of a mediastinal mass is a common challenge in clinical practice, with a wide range of differential diagnosis to
be considered. One of the rarer causes is tuberculosis. Atypical presentations of tuberculosis are well documented in immunocompromised
patients, but should also be considered in the immunocompetent. This case outlines a previously healthy 22 year-old immunocompetent male
presenting with worsening chest pain, positional dyspnea, dry cough and dysphagia. Chest x-ray showed evidence of an isolated anterior
mediastinal mass, which was confirmed on computed tomography. A mediastinoscopy was diagnostic as histology revealed necrotizing
granulomatous inflammation and the presence of acid-fast bacilli, indicating mediastinal tuberculosis. Typically the underlying presentation
of mediastinal tuberculosis is mediastinal lymphadenitis. This case was unusual in that we detected an isolated large anterior mediastinal
mass accompanied by a relatively small burden of mediastinal lymphadenitis. Cases similar to this have been documented in immunosuppressed
patients however in our case no evidence of immunosuppression was found. This case report emphasizes the importance that a detailed and
logical pathway of investigation is pursued when encountering a mediastinal mass. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12890-016-0175-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Mediastinal masses are routinely
encountered in clinical practice and a wide range of differential diagnoses must be considered. A less common cause is tuberculosis, a
disease recognized for its atypical presentations attributed to its ability to affect almost any organ system. Tuberculosis has an incidence
of 126 per 100,000 according to the latest report from the World Health Organization (WHO) . Mycobacterium tuberculosis undergoes lympho-
heamatogenous dissemination after entering the respiratory tract. Typically the mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes are the first lymphatic
tissues M. tuberculosis will encounter and it may then spread to other organ systems. Thirty percent of patients present with extra-
pulmonary tuberculosis, an example of which is illustrated by this case . A 22-year-old Nigerian male presented to the accident and
emergency department with a 2-week history of worsening chest pain associated with positional dyspnea, dry cough and dysphagia. He had no
significant past history, was on no medication and denied any significant family history. The patient was resident in the Republic of
Ireland since early childhood and had no recent travel abroad. Chest radiography illustrated soft tissue enlargement within the right
paratracheal stripe (Fig. 1a). Subsequent computed tomography of the thorax with contrast, revealed a large right-sided mediastinal mass
with accompanying lymphadenopathy that encompassed the pre-tracheal, para-tracheal, tracheobronchial, hilar and subcarinal regions superior
to the right brachiocephalic vein, superior vena cava right pulmonary artery and superior right pulmonary vein (Fig. 1b).Fig. 1 a Initial
chest x-ray demonstrates soft tissue enlargement within the right paratracheal stripe; b Contrast computed tomography of the thorax shows a
large right-sided mediastinal mass with accompanying lymphadenopathy encompassing the pre-tracheal, para-tracheal, tracheobronchial, hilar
and subcarinal regions. (The images have been placed in reverse order and so the caption does not match the image. The CXR should be Figure
1a and the CT image should be Figure 1b) a Initial chest x-ray demonstrates soft tissue enlargement within the right paratracheal stripe; b
Contrast computed tomography of the thorax shows a large right-sided mediastinal mass with accompanying lymphadenopathy encompassing the
pre-tracheal, para-tracheal, tracheobronchial, hilar and subcarinal regions. (The images have been placed in reverse order and so the
caption does not match the image. The CXR should be Figure 1a and the CT image should be Figure 1b) Initial haematological testing revealed
the following: C-reactive protein 62 (<5), ESR 102 (<20) and LDH 819 (208–378). Coagulation studies were also abnormal with a PT of 16.3
(11–13.5) and an INR of 1.4. Other laboratory tests including full blood count, liver function test, troponin, electrolytes and glucose were
normal as were the tumor markers beta human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) and alpha-fetoprotein. Computed tomography of the abdomen and
pelvis was also concurrently done and found to be normal, with no evidence of other lymphadenopathy or masses. Bronchoscopic evaluation
illustrated 50 % external compression of the distal trachea with normal distal airways and no endobronchial mass visualized. Trans-bronchial
biopsies showed no abnormality and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) showed pus cells but no organisms and tested negative for acid-fast bacilli.
A full virology screen including HIV, hepatitis B and C were also negative. Whilst lymphoma was our primary working diagnosis due to the
patient’s age, mildly elevated LDH and the presence of a mass, tissue confirmation was pursued as initial bronchoscopic biopsies were not
confirmatory. A mediastinoscopy was subsequently performed and histology confirmed necrotizing granulomatous inflammation with the presence
of acid fast bacilli (AFB) diagnostic of mediastinal tuberculosis (Fig. 2). The patient was commenced on a standard anti-tuberculosis regime
for a total of 6 months and has since completed his course of treatment. His most recent chest x-ray (CXR) shows interval improvement
(Fig. 3) and he has now been discharged from the respiratory service.Fig. 2Histology slide of a tissue specimen obtained via mediastinoscopy
with Ziehl Neelsen staining shows a single acid-fast bacilli in center of necrosisFig. 3Follow up chest x-ray shows considerable reduction
in the soft tissue previously noted in relation to the right paratracheal stripe Histology slide of a tissue specimen obtained via
mediastinoscopy with Ziehl Neelsen staining shows a single acid-fast bacilli in center of necrosis Follow up chest x-ray shows considerable
reduction in the soft tissue previously noted in relation to the right paratracheal stripe The differential diagnosis of a mediastinal mass
is a common challenge in clinical practice (Table 1). Patients with these lesions are typically asymptomatic until they develop mass
effects, such as chest pain, dyspnea or cough due to compression of local structures. Such symptoms prompted this patient’s presentation.
Investigation of such lesions must consider the wide range of differentials. As part of the initial evaluation, a detailed history and
physical examination should be performed, looking specifically for lymphadenopathy, thyroid enlargement, testicular masses or evidence of
immunosuppression. None of these features were present in this patient. A full haematological screen should be performed including relevant
tumor markers including beta hCG and alpha-fetoprotein. Gene Xpert analysis is another well-recognized modality in rapid diagnosis of
tuberculosis and should be considered in the work up of a mediastinal mass. Contrast computed tomography (CT) of the thorax is useful to
further characterize a mediastinal mass. Radiographic findings suggestive of tuberculosis are a ghost like ring enhancement within a matted
mass of nodes . Importantly, tuberculosis has been shown to mimic malignancy both radiologically and clinically hence diagnostic
confirmation by histology is imperative prior to therapeutic intervention. This can be obtained by bronchoscopy or endoscopic bronchial
ultrasound allowing for fine needle aspirate cytology or transbronchial needle aspirate to obtain a diagnostic pathological specimen.Table
1Differential diagnosis of a mediastinal massLymphomaThymomaGerm cell tumourThyroid enlargementVascular lesionLymphadenopathyCystic lesion
(pleuropericardial or bronchogenic)Tuberculosis Differential diagnosis of a mediastinal mass There are several and varied presentations of
mediastinal tuberculosis including lymph node calcification, oesophagomediastinal fistula, pericardial TB and fibrosing mediastinitis. The
underlying cause of these lesions is mediastinal lymphadenitis, which extends to involve surrounding structures creating strictures and
fistulation . This case was unusual in that we detected an isolated large anterior mediastinal mass accompanied by a relatively small burden
of mediastinal lymphadenitis. Prior cases similar to this have been noted to occur in immunosuppressed individuals such as those with
seropositive HIV with a CD4 T lymphocyte count <200/mm^3 but are even more rarely found in HIV positive patients with a CD4 T lymphocyte
count >200/mm^3 [8, 9]. Such a presentation is unusual in immunocompetent patients, although has been shown to occur more frequently in
patients from countries where TB is endemic . There are few documented cases of tuberculosis presenting as an isolated anterior mediastinal
mass in an immunocompetent patient. Comprehensive review of the literature reveals ten similarly described cases with the majority occurring
in the pediatric population aged 2 years or younger. Of the published cases on adults all three patients were male with age ranging from 32
to 76 years . The masses varied in composition and behavior, with one case describing a cystic mass and another a mass infiltrating the
right atrium. Similar to this case all three patients were treated with medical therapy. The limited published data on adult presentations
of mediastinal tuberculosis in immunocompetent patients does reveal that presentation is usually associated with mass effect symptoms and
that a diagnosis was only revealed following histological confirmation, both features observed in this case . In summary, while the
aetiology of a mediastinal mass can be difficult to establish because of the wide differential, it is imperative that a through and logical
scheme of investigation including tissue diagnosis is pursued. This case aims to highlight the importance of considering tuberculosis in the
differential even in immunocompetent patients presenting with an isolated mediastinal mass that cannot otherwise be explained. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor of this journal. This project was carried out within an appropriate ethical framework. This manuscript
conforms with the CARE guidelines published in 2013 (see Additional file 1). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. N/A. Additional file 1: CARE Checklist (2013) of information to include when writing a case report. (DOCX 1644 kb) CARE Checklist
(2013) of information to include when writing a case report. (DOCX 1644 kb) Human innunodeficiency virus Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Lactate dehydrogenase International normalized ratio Prothrombin time Human chorionic gonadotrophin Chest x-ray Ziehl Neelsen Acid fast
bacilli Computed tomography Competing interests None of the authors involved in this case report have any competing interest in accordance
with BioMed Central’s guidelines. Authors’ contributions SM was the primary author and was responsible for gathering all relevant patient
data, conducting a literature review and drafting the case report. SC was responsible for editing and formatting of the case report. VP also
assisted with critical editing. LC provided advice on discussion points in the conclusion. CR and CO provided diagnostic evaluation of the
tissue samples and supplied the histopathology images in this report. KR assisted in diagnostic investigations resulting in the diagnosis.
CS was the primary consultant for this patient and also provided critical review of the case report. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. N/A. No funding was required for this case report or the research involved.
