Patients with classic Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) that has relapsed after autologous or allogeneic transplant have limited treatment options and
a poor prognosis. Immunotherapy with agents that target the PROGRAMMED DEATH 1 (PD-1) receptor have demonstrated clinical activity with
durable responses in early-phase clinical trials in this patient population; however, patients with a history of allogeneic stem cell
transplantation (SCT) were intentionally excluded from participation in those studies due to concerns for reactivation of graft-versus-host
disease (GVHD). We describe the clinical course of two patients with advanced cHL and prior treatment with allogeneic stem cell
transplantation (SCT) that were treated with the PD-1 inhibitor pembrolizumab. Both patients had no active graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)
at the time initiation of therapy and were maintained on low-dose prednisone. Treatment with pembrolizumab was well tolerated and not
associated with reactivation of GVHD. Both patients responded (1 partial, 1 complete) and remain on therapy as of November 30, 2015. This
report indicates that immunotherapy targeting the PD-1 pathway can be safely administered to patients with cHL and a history of allogeneic
SCT and produce tumor responses. Further studies in this patient population are needed. The safety and therapeutic activity of monoclonal
antibodies targeting the PROGRAMMED DEATH 1 (PD-1) receptor in advanced classic Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) has been demonstrated in two recent
publications [1, 2]. Both studies excluded patients with a previous history of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, primarily due to
safety concerns related to graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). As allogeneic stem cell transplantation (SCT) remains a viable option for the
treatment of select younger patients with advanced cHL [3, 4], these patients are faced with limited treatment options if they fail
allogeneic transplant. Herein we describe the clinical course of two patients with relapsed cHL treated off-label with the PD-1 inhibitor
pembrolizumab who had previously undergone allogeneic SCT. A 30-year-old man was diagnosed with stage IIA cHL in 2007 and treated with
standard ABVD (doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine and dacarbazine) for 6 cycles. No evidence of FDG-avid malignancy was identifiable on
PET-CT obtained after 2 cycles. He proceeded to receive adjuvant radiotherapy to the right neck and chest area. His disease relapsed 6
months later and he was treated with salvage ICE (ifosfamide, carboplatin and etoposide) followed by autologous SCT in March of 2008. Less
than six months after autologous SCT the patient was found to have biopsy-proven relapsed disease in the lungs. He was treated with GVD
(gemcitabine, vinorelbine and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin) and underwent nonmyeloablative allogeneic SCT from a matched related donor in
January of 2009. His post-transplant course was complicated by acute GVHD involving the skin and gut treated with corticosteroids. He
underwent a mediastinoscopy in August 2009 to investigate mediastinal lymphadenopathy and was found to have relapsed disease. Withdrawal of
immunosuppression was attempted; however, follow-up imaging demonstrated progressive disease in the fall of 2009. At that time, grade 1 GVHD
of the liver was found on biopsy done to investigate elevated transaminases. He arrived at our institution in November of 2009 for a second
opinion and was treated with single-agent everolimus as part of a clinical trial (NCT01022996) . After 18 months on therapy with stable
disease the patient developed progression. By October 2014 the patient had received multiple lines of therapy including the histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor panobinostat, single-agent brentuximab vedotin, single-agent bendamustine, weekly single-agent vinblastine,
cyclophosphamide plus carmustine, ICE, and everolimus plus lenalidomide. Unfortunately, his disease continued to relentlessly progress
despite these therapies. By October 2014 the patient had exhausted all reasonable therapies and the results of phase I trials of PD-1
inhibitors for relapsed cHL were published. Unfortunately, his prior history of allogeneic SCT rendered him ineligible for participation in
any of PD-1 inhibitor studies. After counseling the patient as to potential risks and benefits, he agreed to off-study, off-label therapy
with pembrolizumab. On October 21, 2014 the patient received his first infusion of pembrolizumab (2 mg/kg/dose repeated every 3 weeks). At
the time of initiation of therapy he had no evidence of active GVHD on a stable dose of 2.5 mg of prednisone daily (Table 1). On January
2015 (following 3 cycles of pembrolizumab) an 18F-fluorodeoxy-glucose–positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed interval resolution of
the FDG-avid right lung mass, hilar lymphadenopathy, chest wall nodule and intra-abdominal masses consistent with a complete response
(Figure 1). This was reconfirmed after 9 cycles. As of November 2015, the patient had received 16 doses with a durable response and no
reactivation of GVHD. Top panel displays pre-treatment variables. Bottom panel displays follow-up information after initiation of therapy
with pembrolizumab. Abbreviations: SCT, stem cell transplantation; GVHD, graft verses host disease According to National Institutes of
Health Consensus Development Project on Criteria for Clinical Trials in Chronic Graft-versus-Host Disease . Panels A. and (C1/C2) display
pre-treatment scans for patient 1 and 2, respectively. Hypermetabolic masses are observed in the abdomen, lateral right chest wall soft
tissue extending into the lung parenchyma, and right hilum on panel (A). Panel (C1) displays hypermetabolic skeletal lesion involving upper
right sacrum while (C2) demonstrates involvement of L4. Panels (B) and (D1/D2) display follow-up scans obtained to evaluate response to
therapy in patient 1 and 2, respectively. Panel B. displays PET-CT scan obtained on patient 1 after 3 cycles of pembrolizumab showing no
evidence of FDG-avid malignancy. Panel (D1 and D2) displays PET-CT scan obtained on patient 2 after 4 cycles of pembrolizumab showing
resolution of FDG-avid bone lesions. The second patient is a 30-year-old man who was diagnosed with stage IIIS cHL in 2008. His disease was
initially treated with first-line ABVD followed by adjuvant radiotherapy. He relapsed less than a month after the end of radiotherapy. He
was subsequently treated with salvage ICE and progressed after 2 cycles. Therapy with GVD followed and he later underwent autologous SCT in
April 2009 with adjuvant radiotherapy. In April 2013 the patient developed biopsy-proven recurrent disease that was treated with brentuximab
vedotin followed by GVD with good response. The patient underwent nonmyeloablative allogeneic SCT from a matched related donor in January
2014 without complications or evidence of GVHD. In July 2014 the patient developed biopsy-proven relapsed disease in the axial skeleton with
significant pain. Subsequent treatment regimens were ineffective and included single-agent brentuximab vedotin and on-study with
panobinostat and everolimus. Similar to patient 1, by July 7, 2015 the patient had exhausted all reasonable therapies and consented to off-
study pembrolizumab (2 mg/kg/dose repeated every 3 weeks). At the time of initiation of therapy he had no evidence of active GVHD and was
maintained at the dose of 2.5 mg of prednisone daily (Table 1). After the second infusion of pembrolizumab the patient noted significant
improvement in pain secondary to bone metastases and discontinued the use of analgesics. On October 5, 2015 – following 4 cycles of
pembrolizumab – a PET-CT showed resolution of all FDG-avid bone lesions with persistent uptake in spleen and several small abdominal nodes
consistent with partial response (Figure 1). As of November 2015, he continues pembrolizumab therapy (total of 7 infusions to date) without
exacerbation of GHVD. We have described the successful clinical course of two patients with relapsed refractory cHL treated with
pembrolizumab after having failed multiple lines of therapy including allogeneic SCT. Both of our patients responded to therapy (1 CR and 1
PR) and remain on treatment without evidence of disease progression. Treatment with pembrolizumab in these two patients was not associated
with reactivation of GVHD. The current report is the first to describe the safe and successful use of pembrolizumab in patients with cHL who
had previously been treated with allogeneic SCT. Although the PD-1 pathway has been implicated as an escape mechanism for malignant stem
cells following allogeneic transplant , data on the safety and efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors in this setting are scarce. In
animal models, treatment with PD-1 inhibitors is associated with augmentation of a xenograft-versus-host disease in mice transferred with
human lymphocytes . Other types of immune checkpoint inhibitors such as ipilimumab and pidilizumab have been tested in early phase clinical
trials and did include patients with a previous history of allogeneic SCT. A case report describing the use of immunotherapy for the
treatment of metastatic melanoma in long-term survivors of allogeneic SCT has recently been published . With regards to relapsed HL, there
has been a report of one case of relapsed HL after allogeneic SCT that was successfully treated with nivolumab . In all these cases,
treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors did not seem to contribute to exacerbation or reactivation of GVHD. Our limited experience
cannot necessarily be extrapolated to all patients who present with relapsed cHL after having failed previous treatment with allogeneic SCT.
It is important to note that both of our patients had no evidence of active GVHD at the time of therapy with pembrolizumab and were
maintained a low-dose prednisone regimen. This may have contributed to safe administration of this agent. These encouraging results with
respect to safety and efficacy in this important group of patients should spur additional testing of PD-1 inhibitors in this patient
population. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST None of the authors have any relevant conflicts of interest to disclose. GRANT SUPPORT The authors did not
receive any grant support for production of this work. Editorial note This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by
another journal and the authors’ response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review in Oncotarget.
