Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 71 Final Diagnosis: Pulmonary nocardiosis Symptoms: Cough • dyspnea • fever
Medication: Carfillzomib Clinical Procedure: Bronchoscopy Specialty: Infectious Diseases Rare co-existance of disease or pathology The use
of proteasome inhibitors like Bortezomib to treat multiple myeloma has been associated with increased rates of opportunistic infections,
including Nocardia, especially when lymphopenia is present. The prevalence or association of such infections with newer agents like
Carfilzomib is not known. A 71-year-old man with multiple myeloma presented with a 6-week history of respiratory symptoms and cyclic fevers.
He was undergoing chemotherapy with Carfilzomib. Work-up revealed severe lymphopenia and a CT chest showed multiple lung nodules and a mass-
like consolidation. He underwent a bronchoscopy, and respiratory cultures grew Nocardia species. He responded well to intravenous
antibiotics with resolution of symptoms and CT findings. With the introduction of newer agents like Carfilzomib for the treatment of
multiple myeloma, clinicians must maintain a high degree of suspicion for opportunistic infections to achieve early diagnosis and treatment.
Proteasome inhibitors (PI) are being increasingly used to treat multiple myeloma (MM). They have been shown to reduce antigen processing and
CD8 T cell function vital for cell-mediated immunity. PI bortezomib has been associated with increased rates of opportunistic infections
when severe lymphopenia is present. Carfilzomib is a novel PI approved for the treatment of refractory MM for which the prevalence of
opportunistic infections is not known. We report a case of pulmonary nocardiosis in a patient with refractory MM being treated with
Carfilzomib chemotherapy. A 71-year-old man with MM presented with a 6-week history of fever and cough. He was diagnosed with MM 6 years
before presentation and underwent autologous stem cell transplantation followed by lenalidomide maintenance. He relapsed and dexamethasone
with bortezomib was added to his treatment. Due to breakthrough disease (8 weeks before admission), he was started on carfilzomib and
received 13 cycles. Two weeks into therapy he developed transient low-grade post-chemotherapy fever and progressive dyspnea. He denied
involvement in outdoor work or exposure to soil and had no weight loss, seizures, headache, focal weakness, skin abscesses, or ulcerations
On admission, he was febrile and tachypneic. Examination was significant for diminished breath sounds over the right mid- and lower lung
zones. WBC count was 6500/mcl with 90% neutrophils and 1% lymphocytes. CT angiography ruled out pulmonary embolism, but revealed a mass-like
consolidation in the right lower lobe, with bilateral airspace consolidations (Figure 1). Bronchoscopy, bronchoalveolar lavage, and
transbronchial biopsies were negative for malignancy; however, respiratory cultures grew Nocardia abscessus. He was treated with intravenous
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) and meropenem. Repeat CT showed a significant decrease in the mass-like lesion on the right, now
with cavitation and resolution of the airspace consolidations (Figure 2) within a period of 3 weeks. He was discharged on trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole and minocycline with close follow-up. Unfortunately, he returned with a fever and CT evidence of worsening right lower lobe
consolidation. Treatment with intravenous meropenem and TMP-SMX were restarted. Malignancy was excluded by a CT-guided biopsy. Due to
concerns that TMP-SMX were contributing to leukopenia, it was changed to tigecycline. He showed dramatic clinical improvement and was
discharged to complete 42 days of intravenous tigecycline and meropenem while awaiting final Nocardia sensitivities. Close follow-up with
the Infectious Diseases Department and Oncology was scheduled. He is currently on a chemotherapy regimen of Dexamethasone, Bortezomib, and
Panobinostat for the treatment of MM. Nocardia produces a life-threatening infection in patients with defective cell-mediated immunity, with
a high propensity for delayed diagnosis because of the non-specific presentation and radiographic findings. In addition to the severe
morbidity, including its predilection for the CNS, the diagnosis often involves prolonged courses of antibiotics and associated toxicities.
There are multiple risk factors that predispose patients to infection with Nocardia, and conditions or medications that suppress cell-
mediated immunity predominate. Multiple myeloma causes immune deficiency mainly through B-cell dysfunction. Proteasomes are large protein
complexes in nucleated cells that bind and degrade ubiquitinated proteins, thus helping, along with lysosomes, to maintain protein
homeostasis. Malignant cells are highly dependent on this pathway. Proteasome inhibitors cause buildup of substrates, disrupt signaling
pathways, and arrest cell cycle progression. Proteasome inhibitors like Bortezomib have been shown to have numerous effects on the immune
system , which are all vital for cell-mediated immunity. They decrease proliferation and viability of T cells and the number and function of
NK and CD8 T cells .They impair antigen presentation, dendritic cell function , and alter cytokine secretion . The use of bortezomib has
been associated with increased incidence of opportunistic infections, including Nocardia, within the treatment period when severe
lymphopenia is present . Unlike bortezomib, whose effect is slowly reversible, carfilzomib exhibits irreversible inhibition of proteasome
activity. The onset of action is similar but its effect is more sustained and specific . In our patient, the lymphocyte count during
admission was 1%, likely induced by carfilzomib and bortezomib, which may have contributed to Nocardia infection. In addition, the patient
was also on dexamethasone, which contributed to the overall state of immunosuppression and perhaps the predisposition to nocardiosis. Based
on our case and recent reports of nocardiosis, there may be a role for close clinical monitoring in patients with severe lymphopenia who are
treated with proteasome inhibitors for opportunistic nocardiosis. With advancements in the treatments for multiple myeloma, clinicians must
have a high degree of suspicion for the development of opportunistic infections, including Nocardia, in an effort to achieve early and
effective diagnosis and treatment. Mass-like lesion at the right lower lobe with airspace consolidations. Significant improvement in the
mass-like lesion, now with evidence of cavitation and resolution of airspace consolidations.
