Foveal detachment associated with foveoschisis usually takes a progressive course, and is associated with a poor visual outcome. The purpose
of this study was to report the spontaneous resolution of foveal detachment in patients with myopic traction maculopathy without posterior
vitreous detachment. A retrospective study involving eight cases of high myopia with foveoschisis and foveal detachment in which the
subfoveal fluid had spontaneously resolved. The clinical characteristics and optical coherence tomography (OCT) findings were described. All
cases involved predominant schisis in the outer retina, with six showing internal limiting membrane detachment. The average central foveal
thickness was 445.1 μm, and the average foveal detachment height was 271.5 μm. None of the cases involved traction of the vitreomacular
interface or posterior vitreous detachment (PVD), either before or after the resolution of foveal detachment. In seven cases, the mean best-
corrected visual acuity improved after foveal reattachment. Spontaneous reattachment not associated with PVD can occur in cases of high
myopic traction maculopathy, especially in those without obvious vitreomacular traction. Myopic foveoschisis is a complication of high
myopia that can affect visual function. Studies have suggested that this condition usually takes a progressive course, with only a minority
of cases remaining stable during follow-up . Foveal detachment occurs in 34.5–72.0 % of patients with this condition, either at the time of
diagnosis or during follow-up ; this is usually associated with a poor visual outcome . However, a recent study involving 207 patients
showed a much more stable clinical course, with the myopic foveoschisis progressing in only 11.6 % of cases during a follow-up period of
more than 2 years . Moreover, several investigations have suggested that surgical interventions, such as gas tamponade or vitrectomy,
improve anatomical and functional outcomes in patients with this condition [1, 2, 5–7]. Nonetheless, complications such as macular hole
formation have been reported [1, 5, 6], and functional outcomes may not parallel structural improvements [8, 9]. With regard to
pathogenesis, foveoschisis is related to strong pre-retinal traction combined with axial length elongation [1, 3, 10–12]. In a previous
report involving spontaneous resolution of macular detachment, a complete posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) occurred before the
reattachment of the macula; for this reason, the investigators suggested that the PVD contributed to the reattachment . Similarly, another
recent study suggested that rupture of the internal limiting membrane (ILM) reduces traction and leads to resolution of schisis and foveal
detachment . In this study, which involved eight patients, we report the spontaneous resolution of foveal detachment in myopic tractional
maculopathy that is unassociated with PVD or ILM rupture. In addition, we present the clinical course, as well as the findings from optical
coherence tomography (OCT). Finally, various factors that may be associated with this spontaneous improvement are discussed. We
retrospectively reviewed the cases of eight consecutive patients with myopic foveoschisis in whom a foveal detachment had spontaneously
resolved; all patients had been diagnosed between January 2009 and December 2014. OCT images were traced backward to the patients’ original
visits. All patients had been followed up by the Department of Ophthalmology at the National Taiwan University Hospital, and written
informed consent had been obtained from all patients. Approval for this study was obtained from the National Taiwan University Hospital
Research Ethics Committee, and it adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. High myopia was defined as myopia of ≥ 6 diopters,
and/or axial length ≥ 26 mm; spontaneous resolution of foveal detachment was defined as reattachment of the fovea without any surgical
intervention (gas injection or vitrectomy). Clinical data were collected by retrospective chart review in all cases; these data included
patient age, gender, auto-refraction, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), axial length (measured using the LENSTAR LS 900; Haag-Streit USA
Inc., Mason, OH, USA), and findings from both slit-lamp and dilated fundus examinations. Findings from serial OCT images (spectral domain
OCT, Cirrus™; HD-OCT, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Inc., Dublin, CA, USA; or RTVue™ RT100 version 3.5; Optovue Inc., Fremont, CA, USA) were recorded
during the follow-up period. These included inner plexiform layer (IPL) retinoschisis , outer retinal retinoschisis, lamellar hole, ILM
detachment, inner segment/outer segment (IS/OS) junction defect, and vitreoretinal interface traction. We carefully reviewed all the OCT
images, which were obtained from a 5-line raster scan of the fovea, as well as from a macular cube scan of the entire macular area.
Retinoschisis on the OCT images was classified according to the extent of outer schisis, as described by Shimada : no macular retinoschisis
(S0), extra-foveal retinoschisis (S1), fovea-only retinoschisis (S2), foveal and partial macular area retinoschisis (S3), entire macular
area retinoschisis (S4). The height of the foveal detachment was defined as the largest distance, measured manually, from the surface of the
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) to the photoreceptor cell ellipsoid zone. The longest of these measurements in the series of OCT images was
chosen as the foveal detachment height for each particular patient. The central foveal thickness (CFT) was measured at the same site, and
was defined as the distance between the RPE and the inner retinal surface. Again, the longest of these measurements in the series of OCT
images was chosen as the central foveal thickness . The presence of PVD was determined by OCT examination, funduscopic findings, or clinical
records of previous ocular surgery. In patients who had developed foveal detachment during follow-up after an initial presentation of only
foveoschisis (patient Nos. 1–4 in Table 1), the duration of foveal detachment was defined as the interval between the first date on which
OCT had shown foveal detachment and the first date on which it had shown complete resolution of foveal detachment.Table 1Clinical features
of patients with myopic foveoschisis combined with a foveal detachment that spontaneously resolvedPatient no.Age (years)GenderRE
(Diopter)Axial length (mm)Chorioretinal atrophyClinical courseSerial BCVAa (logMAR)Duration of FD (months)161–65WomanIOL28.78D + PFS →
FS + FD → FS0.8 / 0.8 / 0.831251–55Woman−18.3730.47DFS → FS + FD → FS0.7 / 1.0 / 0.827341–45Woman−17.031.05D + PFS → FS + FD → FS0.5 / 1.3 /
1.024441–45Man−13.2529.85DFS → FS + FD → FS0.1 / 0.3 / 0.056566–70Man−6.3728.32DFS + FD → no FS/FDb NA / 2.0 /
1.5NA641–45Woman−13.028.36DFS + FD → FSNA / 0.4 / 0.1NA751–55Woman−11.75NADFS + FD → FSNA / 2.0 / 1.0NA866–70WomanIOL30.36DFS + FD → FSNA /
0.5 / 0.3NAMean ± SD54.6 ± 10.0−13.3 ± 3.929.6 ± 1.022.0 ± 9.6 BCVA best-corrected visual acuity, D diffuse atrophy, FD foveal detachment,
FS foveoschisis, IOL intraocular lens, NA not available, P patchy atrophy, RE refractive error, RPE retina pigment epithelium, SD standard
deviation aThe serial BCVA was recorded in the following order: with FS but before FD–during FS and FD–after FD had resolved bIn patient No.
5, the FS and FD both resolved completely during follow-up Clinical features of patients with myopic foveoschisis combined with a foveal
detachment that spontaneously resolved BCVA best-corrected visual acuity, D diffuse atrophy, FD foveal detachment, FS foveoschisis, IOL
intraocular lens, NA not available, P patchy atrophy, RE refractive error, RPE retina pigment epithelium, SD standard deviation aThe serial
BCVA was recorded in the following order: with FS but before FD–during FS and FD–after FD had resolved bIn patient No. 5, the FS and FD both
resolved completely during follow-up The change in BCVA (measured in logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution ) after resolution of the
foveal detachment was analyzed using the student’s t-test for paired samples; p-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. The
clinical characteristics of the patients are listed in Table 1. The mean age was 54.6 ± 10.0 years (range = 44–68 years). The average
spherical equivalent measured was −13.3 ± 3.9 diopters (range = −18.37−6.37) and the average axial length measured was 29.6 ± 1.0 mm
(range = 28.32–31.05). The refractive error before cataract surgery was not available for patient Nos. 1 and 8. Diffuse chorioretinal
atrophy was noted in all cases, while patchy atrophy over the macular area was noted in patient Nos. 1 and 3. Four patients had an initial
presentation of foveoschisis and foveal detachment; the other four developed foveal detachment during the follow-up period. The mean
duration of foveal detachment in the latter four cases was 22.0 ± 9.6 months (range = 6–31 months). In seven of the eight patients, BCVA
improved after the subretinal fluid had resolved, and mean BCVA was significantly better after foveal detachment had resolved compared with
when the fovea was detached (p < 0.05). The OCT findings are summarized in Table 2, and Fig. 1 shows a typical example of such findings. All
patients had S4 retinoschisis, except for patient No. 5, who had foveal and partial macular area retinoschisis, which was therefore
classified as S3. None of the patients had visible vitreoretinal interface traction (epiretinal membrane or vitreomacular traction). In all
patients, except for No. 4, the IS/OS junction was disrupted after the retina had reattached. Patient 6 presented with retinoschisis, foveal
detachment, and an inner lamellar hole at the initial visit. In addition, the lamellar hole continued to increase in size for as long as the
schisis persisted, despite the resolution of subretinal fluid. An outer lamellar hole was noted at initial presentation in patient No. 8,
who also had foveal detachment and schisis. All cases of retinoschisis mainly involved the outer retina; ILM detachment was noted in six
cases. After the foveal detachment had resolved, the schisis remained the same in four cases, became less prominent in three cases, and
completely resolved in one case. The average height of foveal detachment was 271.5 ± 68.2 μm (range = 191–396 μm). The mean CFT was
445.1 ± 79.6 μm (range = 330–550 μm). Two representative cases are presented here:Table 2Optical coherence tomography findings from patients
with myopic foveoschisis and foveal detachment that spontaneously resolvedPatient no.Classificationa ERM/VMTILM
detachmentRetinoschisisLHPersisted schisisIS/OS junction disruptionFD (μm)CFT (μm)1S4Removedb +Outer-++2724932S4-+Inner & outerc
-++2304823S4-+Outer-Partiald +2303414S4-+Outer-+-1914995S3--Outer--+3714996S4-+Inner & outerc +e ++2423677S4--Outer-Partiald
+2403308S4-+Outer+f Partiald +396550 CFT central foveal thickness, ERM epiretinal membrane, FD the height of foveal detachment, ILM internal
limiting membrane, IS/OS inner segment/outer segment, LH lamellar hole, VMT vitreomacular traction+ = present; − = absent aThe
classification of retinoschisis was based on the extent of outer retinoschisis described by Shimada , where schisis involving the fovea and
partial macula was classified as S3, and schisis involving the entire macula area was classified as S4 bIn patient No. 1, the ERM was
removed via vitrectomy without ILM peeling one month before the development of foveal detachment cIn patient Nos. 2 and 6, the retinoschisis
involved both the inner (inner plexiform layer) and outer retina dIn patient Nos. 3, 7, and 8, the retinoschisis had decreased, with some
residual schisis in the outer retina eIn patient No. 6, an inner lamellar hole was noted at initial presentation, with enlargement during
follow-up fIn patient No. 8, an outer lamellar hole was noted at initial presentationFig. 1Optical coherence tomography (OCT) image from
patient No. 2. Representative OCT image from patient No. 2 showing typical findings: ILM detachment, retinoschisis, disruption of the IS/OS
junction, and foveal detachment. The schisis was more prominent in the outer retina, and no vitreoretinal interface traction or outer
laminar break was seen Optical coherence tomography findings from patients with myopic foveoschisis and foveal detachment that spontaneously
resolved CFT central foveal thickness, ERM epiretinal membrane, FD the height of foveal detachment, ILM internal limiting membrane, IS/OS
inner segment/outer segment, LH lamellar hole, VMT vitreomacular traction + = present; − = absent aThe classification of retinoschisis was
based on the extent of outer retinoschisis described by Shimada , where schisis involving the fovea and partial macula was classified as S3,
and schisis involving the entire macula area was classified as S4 bIn patient No. 1, the ERM was removed via vitrectomy without ILM peeling
one month before the development of foveal detachment cIn patient Nos. 2 and 6, the retinoschisis involved both the inner (inner plexiform
layer) and outer retina dIn patient Nos. 3, 7, and 8, the retinoschisis had decreased, with some residual schisis in the outer retina eIn
patient No. 6, an inner lamellar hole was noted at initial presentation, with enlargement during follow-up fIn patient No. 8, an outer
lamellar hole was noted at initial presentation Optical coherence tomography (OCT) image from patient No. 2. Representative OCT image from
patient No. 2 showing typical findings: ILM detachment, retinoschisis, disruption of the IS/OS junction, and foveal detachment. The schisis
was more prominent in the outer retina, and no vitreoretinal interface traction or outer laminar break was seen A 68-year-old man without
any specific underlying disease was referred to our clinic and received scleral buckling to treat retinal detachment in the right eye.
During the preoperative evaluation, poor vision in the left eye was noted, with BCVA being 2.0 logMAR. Fundoscopy revealed a typical myopic
fundus with diffuse atrophy. OCT showed foveal detachment with foveoschisis in the left eye (Fig. 2). The schisis mainly occurred in the
outer retina, without notable ILM detachment or lamellar hole formation. Furthermore, there was no macular hole or visible premacular
traction. The axial lengths were 27.40 mm and 28.32 mm in the right and left eyes, respectively. The subretinal fluid, as well as the
schisis in the left eye, gradually decreased during follow-up, and the retina had reattached one year later. Specifically, the schisis had
resolved completely four months after the reattachment of the fovea—OCT revealed an attached retina with a disruption of the IS/OS junction.
The patient’s BCVA in the left eye was 1.5 logMAR at the last visit, 23 months after the initial presentation.Fig. 2Serial optical coherence
tomography (OCT) images from patient No. 5. Serial OCT images from a 68-year-old man (patient No. 5) demonstrate spontaneous resolution of
foveoschisis and foveal detachment. a At presentation, OCT showed foveoschisis of the outer retina combined with foveal detachment. b One
year later, the subretinal fluid had resolved spontaneously, and the severity of schisis had decreased. c Four months after the detachment
had resolved, OCT revealed complete resolution of foveoschisis, as well as some tissue loss in the outer retina and disruption of the IS/OS
junction Serial optical coherence tomography (OCT) images from patient No. 5. Serial OCT images from a 68-year-old man (patient No. 5)
demonstrate spontaneous resolution of foveoschisis and foveal detachment. a At presentation, OCT showed foveoschisis of the outer retina
combined with foveal detachment. b One year later, the subretinal fluid had resolved spontaneously, and the severity of schisis had
decreased. c Four months after the detachment had resolved, OCT revealed complete resolution of foveoschisis, as well as some tissue loss in
the outer retina and disruption of the IS/OS junction A 44-year-old woman with high myopia presented with a history of vitrectomy to treat
retinal detachment in the right eye. She complained of decreased vision in the left eye, which had persisted for one month prior to her
initial visit to our hospital. Fundoscopy revealed a tessellated fundus with diffuse atrophy in the left eye; OCT showed foveoschisis with
foveal detachment, as well as an inner lamellar hole (Fig. 3). Moreover, ILM detachment was also noted on the OCT image. The patient’s BCVA
was 0.4 logMAR, and her axial length was 28.36 mm in the left eye. Six months later, the retina had reattached without treatment, and the
patient’s BCVA had improved to 0.1 logMAR. Although foveoschisis persisted, and the lamellar hole continued to enlarge during the subsequent
two years, no macular hole formed. The final BCVA in the left eye was 0.4 logMAR, with cataract progression.Fig. 3Serial optical coherence
tomography (OCT) images from patient No. 6. The serial OCT images from a 44-year-old woman with high myopia (patient No. 6) show
spontaneously resolved foveal detachment and enlarged inner lamellar hole. a The OCT at initial presentation showed retinoschisis, mainly
over the outer retina, and ILM detachment. An inner lamellar hole was also present. No vitreomacular interface traction was noted. b The
retina had reattached 6 months later, without operation, with disruption to the IS/OS junction visible on the same image. The schisis, ILM
detachment, and inner lamellar hole persisted. c After 44 months, the macula remained attached, while the inner lamellar hole had enlarged
without the formation of a macular hole. The retinoschisis over the outer retina was still visible, as was the disruption to the IS/OS
junction Serial optical coherence tomography (OCT) images from patient No. 6. The serial OCT images from a 44-year-old woman with high
myopia (patient No. 6) show spontaneously resolved foveal detachment and enlarged inner lamellar hole. a The OCT at initial presentation
showed retinoschisis, mainly over the outer retina, and ILM detachment. An inner lamellar hole was also present. No vitreomacular interface
traction was noted. b The retina had reattached 6 months later, without operation, with disruption to the IS/OS junction visible on the same
image. The schisis, ILM detachment, and inner lamellar hole persisted. c After 44 months, the macula remained attached, while the inner
lamellar hole had enlarged without the formation of a macular hole. The retinoschisis over the outer retina was still visible, as was the
disruption to the IS/OS junction The evolution of foveoschisis in high myopia can be diverse. For instance, it is generally believed that
the condition takes a progressive course in most cases; however, in a recent study involving the most patients with myopic retinoschisis
reported in any investigation to date, the disease had progressed in only 24 (11.6 %) of 207 eyes during follow-up , with retinal detachment
developing in 7 of those 24. The same researchers reported that the schisis had spontaneously improved in 8 of the 207 eyes, and it had
completely resolved in 6 of those. In this study, we analyzed eight cases of foveoschisis in which foveal detachment spontaneously resolved
during follow-up without obvious changes in the vitreoretinal relationship. These clinical courses imply that myopic foveoschisis, and the
foveal detachment associated with it, has a more complex etiology. The pathogenesis of foveoschisis is related to strong traction on the
retina, which is in turn caused by rigidity of the ILM, posterior vitreous, epiretinal membrane, and retinal vessels [3, 10]. Increases in
the axial length, which are associated with pathological myopia, also play a role in generating tractional force from the tissues listed
above. Previous studies have associated various factors with the development of foveal detachment and foveoschisis: axial length > 31 mm,
macular chorioretinal atrophy, and vitreoretinal interface factors , as well as ILM detachment, and IPL retinoschisis . However, the average
axial length measured in our study was 29.6 mm, and only one patient had an axial length over 31 mm. In addition, none of our patients had
any traction in the vitreomacular interface that was visible by either fundoscopy or OCT. The relatively short axial length, as well as the
absence of visible vitreomacular interface factors, indicates less severe traction on the retina, which may contribute to the spontaneous
resolution of foveal detachment in our study. Using OCT, Fujimoto et al. showed a higher incidence of ILM detachment and IPL retinoschisis
in foveoschisis patients with foveal detachment than in those without detachment . These findings may suggest that a stronger inward
traction is generated at the vitreous membrane, as well as at the rigid ILM, and that this is transmitted to the outer retina through the
columnar structure in the layers of the retinoschisis. Likewise, Shimada et al. reported two cases of ILM disruption prior to spontaneous
resolution of retinoschisis, and assumed that the disruption of the already detached ILM releases the severe traction . In our study, the
retinoschises were mainly confined to the outer retina, and ILM detachment was noted in six eyes (75 %). No disruption of any detached ILM
was noted in our study, at least in the scanning area. The lack of IPL retinoschisis in six of our eight cases may indicate a less severe
traction, and this may serve as a predictive factor for spontaneous resolution of the subretinal fluid. The lower foveal detachment height
and shorter CFT provide further evidence for less severe traction in our patients than in those from a previous study who had foveoschisis
and foveal detachment that showed a progressive course and required surgery . In our previous study on the treatment of foveoschisis, the
average heights of foveal detachment (576.9 ± 378.6 μm) and CFT (762.8 ± 314.7 μm) were significantly greater than in this study (p < 0.05).
Thus, we would suggest a quantitative measurement of these two parameters before considering surgical treatment. A previous study from
Shimada et al. found that the formation of an outer lamellar hole predisposes a patient to foveal detachment in myopic retinoschisis . In
none of our patients did any lamellar hole occur during the follow-up period, except for patient No. 8, who had an outer lamellar hole at
the initial presentation. Foveal detachment developed during the follow-up period in four cases in our study, and the OCT images from these
cases showed no evidence of outer lamellar hole formation before the retinal detachment. However, it is uncertain whether this really
indicates a favorable disease process; it may simply have been due to inadequate scanning, because only a small cubic region of the macular
area was examined. One eye in our series had an inner lamellar hole, which enlarged after the subretinal fluid resolved. The enlarged
opening of the hole in this eye may have released some of the traction; in fact, loss of the columnar structure of the retina, caused by the
hole itself, may actually have decreased transmission of the inward traction. Both factors may have played a role in the resolution of the
foveal detachment. In one previous report in which macular detachment spontaneously resolved, complete PVD occurred before the reattachment
of macula; the investigators therefore postulated PVD as a contributing factor to the reattachment . Indeed, PVD occurred in four of the
eight eyes with decreased or resolved retinoschisis that were reported by Shimada et al. , and in three of the four eyes reported by Hirota
et al. in which traction maculopathy had resolved . Nonetheless, no such association was observed in our study. One of our patients had
received pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) long before the macular detachment, and PVD was induced during that operation; in none of the others
was PVD found, whether by OCT or fundoscopy. This was true both before and after the foveal detachment had resolved. Although there was no
obvious evidence of vitreomacular membrane or PVD in our cases, even after all the OCT images had been carefully reviewed, it remains
possible that posterior hyaloid detachment was not detected by OCT before the resolution of foveal detachment . Nonetheless, as our cases
were different from those of previous reports, we believe a different mechanism may have been involved in the formation of foveal
detachment, and factors other than PVD may have been responsible for the resolution of macular detachment in the eyes without detectable
vitreomacular interface tractions. In previous studies, PPV with or without ILM peeling has been used to treat foveal detachment and
foveoschisis [1, 2, 5, 6]; the procedure is generally associated with a positive visual outcome. A less invasive procedure using the gas
tamponade has also been proposed to treat myopic foveoschisis with foveal detachment, and also results in favorable outcomes . However,
macular hole formation is not an uncommon complication after vitrectomy to treat myopic foveoschisis [1, 5, 6], especially in those with
IS/OS junction defect . In our study, although seven of the eight patients had IS/OS junction defect, none developed macular hole after
their foveal detachment had resolved spontaneously. Subretinal fluid was the main cause of visual impairment among our patients; visual
acuity improved significantly after the retina reattached, even in those with longstanding subretinal fluid and IS/OS junction defect.
Nonetheless, the final visual acuity was poor in most cases, because of the duration for which the subretinal fluid and the disruption to
the IS/OS junction had persisted. The present study was limited by its small number of patients. Furthermore, as it was retrospective in
nature, it lacked a well-designed control group. Nonetheless, the investigation constituted a longitudinal follow-up, over a relatively long
period, of patients with foveoschisis and foveal detachment. Furthermore, our report presents the common OCT findings in such cases. We
found that foveal detachment can spontaneously resolve through previously unreported mechanisms; this should be taken into consideration
before surgery is planned, especially in eyes with a relatively short axial length, a predominant outer segment retinoschisis, or no obvious
vitreomacular interface traction. Further studies are needed, using a greater number of cases and well controlled approaches, to determine
the exact predictive factors for this different clinical course. Spontaneous reattachment of foveal detachment and resolution of
foveoschisis can occur in cases with high myopic traction maculopathy without evidence of PVD, especially in those without obvious
vitreomacular tractions. This possibility should be taken into consideration before surgery is planned in such cases. best-corrected visual
acuity central foveal thickness internal limiting membrane inner plexiform layer inner segment/outer segment optical coherence tomography
pars plana vitrectomy posterior vitreous detachment Competing interests None of the authors have any competing interests, financial or
otherwise. Authors’ contributions TL, TH, and CY were involved in management, analysis, interpretation, and preparation of the data, as well
as interpretation and preparation of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors received no grant
support in reporting these clinical observations.
