Zoledronic acid-induced uveitis (ZAIU) is rare but severe, and has been recently considered part of an acute phase reaction. Only 15 cases
have been reported since 2005. Here we describe a case with macular edema, which is the first reported case observed after long-term
alendronate tolerance. A 63-year-old Asian woman received her first intravenous zoledronic acid treatment for the management of
postmenopausal osteoporosis as a more convenient substitute for oral alendronate. Twenty-four hours later, bilateral eye irritations,
periorbital swelling, blurred vision, and diplopia presented. The complete blood count and transaminase levels were normal, but the
erythrocytic sedimentation, C-reactive protein, and serum C4 levels were elevated. On detailed ophthalmological examination, a diagnosis of
bilateral acute uveitis and macular edema in the right eye was made. The ocular symptoms were not improved until administration of topical
and oral steroids. Complete resolution was achieved. There was no rechallenge of bisphosphonates, and no recurrence at 6 months follow-up.
Based on an extensive review, abnormal fundus is rarely reported, especially in cases of macular edema. Rechallenge with zoledronic acid in
five cases induced no additional uveitis, and changing the medication to pamidronate in another patient was also tolerated. Interestingly,
our patient suffered from uveitis soon after intravenous zoledronate exposure after a two-year tolerance to oral alendronate. This is the
first report of zoledronic acid induced uveitis with macular edema after long-term alendronate tolerance. Prior oral alendronate may not
entirely prevent ZAIU. Steroids are usually necessary in the treatment of ZAIU. Bisphosphonate rechallenge is not fully contraindicated, and
prior steroid administration may be a more reasonable treatment choice according to the available evidence. Zoledronic acid is generally
well-tolerated in the management of osteoporosis and other metabolic bone diseases . The most frequent adverse event is acute phase reaction
(APR), which occurs in nearly half of the patients after zoledronate infusion, but usually lasts for a short time with less severity .
Zoledronic acid-induced uveitis (ZAIU) is rare; the incidence was reported to be 0.8–1.1 % [3, 4]. Some severe cases have presented with
transient reduced visual acuity . Previously, other bisphosphonates (pamidronate [15, 16], alendronate , and clodronate ) have also been
reported to be associated with acute uveitis. Uveitis is not commonly considered to be part of the APR, but they occur within the same time
frame, suggesting that it may have a similar pathogenesis [2, 19, 20]. Stepwise regression of a phase three clinical trial showed less APR
after zoledronate infusion in previous users of oral bisphosphonates . Due to the low incidence [3, 4], even a prospective randomized study
failed to document the risk factors of ZAIU . Presently, only 15 individual cases have been reported [5–14, 22–25]. We describe a case
accompanied with right macular edema occurring during the management of postmenopausal osteoporosis with the substitution of the more
convenient orally administered alendronate. To our knowledge, this is the first report of ZAIU with macular edema, as well as the first
report of ZAIU after long-term alendronate tolerance. A 63-year-old Asian woman received her first dose of zoledronic acid (Aclasta®,
5 mg/100 mL solution; Novartis, San Mateo, CA, USA) for postmenopausal osteoporosis. She suffered from a past hepatitis B virus infection.
In the past 2 years, she was on oral alendronate (70 mg, once per week), and the patient regularly used calcium and vitamin D supplements.
Slit-lamp and fundoscopy examinations before the application of zoledronic acid revealed right epiretinal membrane and bilateral
xerophthalmia. Twenty-four hours after the infusion (5 mg in 100 mL normal saline over 15 min at a constant infusion rate), she began
experiencing multiple symptoms, including fatigue and weakness, generalized aches and pains, bilateral eye irritation, periorbital swelling,
blurred vision, and diplopia. Upon examination, her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/40 in the left eye and 20/60 in the right eye, and
her intraocular pressure was 17 mm Hg, bilaterally. Slit-lamp examination revealed conjunctival hyperemia, ciliary injection, flare (2+),
keratic precipitates (±), and trace cells in the anterior chamber. Posterior synechiae was also present. Fundus and optical coherence
tomography (OCT) examinations revealed right macular edema (Fig. 1), and fluorescein angiography showed hyperfluorescence of the optic disk.
Hematological exams of complete blood counts and transaminase levels were normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation was 95 mm/h, the C-reactive
protein was elevated to 2.69 mg/dL, and the serum C4 level was slightly increased to 0.45 g/L. Bilateral acute uveitis was diagnosed and
topical ganciclovir, pranoprofen, fluorometholone, and atropine were prescribed. Two days later, the ocular symptoms worsened, and treatment
with retrobulbar injection of methylprednisolone and oral prednisolone was started. The patient’s ocular symptoms improved remarkably in the
following 3 days, when best-corrected visual acuity reestablished to 20/30 bilaterally, and flare, keratic precipitates, cells, and macular
edema disappeared. The patient continued with oral prednisolone, tapering slowly over the following 6 weeks. She achieved complete
resolution, with no rechallenge and no recurrence at the 6 month follow-up.Fig. 1Optical coherence tomography examinations revealed right
macular edema in a postmenopausal women with ZAIU. Two days after the intravenous administration of zoledronic acid, the examination of
optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed right macular edema with epiretinal membrane (arrow) and a normal left macula Optical coherence
tomography examinations revealed right macular edema in a postmenopausal women with ZAIU. Two days after the intravenous administration of
zoledronic acid, the examination of optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed right macular edema with epiretinal membrane (arrow) and a
normal left macula According to the Naranjo adverse drug reaction probability scale, in our case study a score of 8 indicates a probable
association between zoledronic acid and uveitis. Regarding previously published cases, a probable to definite causality has been reported.
The National Osteoporosis Foundation (NOF) recommends that any eye inflammation related to bisphosphonate should be reported to the
healthcare provider as soon as possible . However, due to the low prevalence and lack of recognition, although recommended by an
ophthalmologist, the correct diagnosis was made 2 days after the onset of eye irritations, which worsened the ocular symptoms of our
patient, and eye drops of antivirals were inappropriately prescribed. Fortunately, all the ocular manifestations recovered promptly,
including the right macular edema. Clinical features of 16 published cases (including our case) with ZAIU are shown in Table 1. Eight cases
suffered from osteoporosis (including our case) [5–8, 13, 22, 23], four with bone metastasis from malignant tumors [9–11, 24], one with
frontal hyperostosis and breast cancer , one with back and femur pain from the treatment of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined
significance (MGUS) , and the remaining two cases had risks of osteopenia due to leuprolide treatment for prostate cancer . All the ocular
manifestations occurred in 3 days. Only two out of 16 patients had a past ocular history. Bilateral eye involvement appeared in one-third of
the patients, corresponding to a previous study . The main ocular symptoms and signs included eye pain, blurred vision, diplopia,
photophobia, lid edema, proptosis, conjunctival chemosis, hyperemia, and ophthalmoplegia. Nearly half of the patients presented with
systemic symptoms. Posterior synechiae was observed in 6 patients, and most of the cases were cured. Choroidal folds and vitreous haze
presented in some unusual cases. However, abnormal fundus was rarely reported, especially macular edema, as described in our case.Table
1Clinical features of the 16 published cases (including our case) with zoledronic acid induced uveitisCaseAgeEye involvedTime from exposure
to onset of ocular menifestationsIndicationsOcular history1 66unilateral2dpostmenopausal osteoporosisno2 75unilateral2dosteoporosisno3
58unilateralNAosteoporosisno4 58unilateral10 hosteoporosisno5 56unilateral12 hpostmenopausal osteoporosisno6 70unilateral1dfrontal
hyperostosis after breast cancerno7 54bilateral1dbreast cancer with bone matastasisno8 78unilateral48 hprostate cancer with bone
matastasisno9 48unilateral24 hbreast cancer with bone matastasisno10 54unilateral3dbreast cancer with lung and bone matastasisno11
56bilateral72 hprostate cancer treated with leuprolideno12 68bilateral60 hprostate cancer treated with leuprolideno13
60unilateral24 hosteoporosis and breast canceryes14 62bilateral48 hback and femur pain in MGUSno15 59unilateral2dosteoporosisno16a
63bilateral24 hpostmenopausal osteoporosisyes aThe case described in this report, NA not available, MGUS monoclonal gammopathy of
undetermined significance Clinical features of the 16 published cases (including our case) with zoledronic acid induced uveitis aThe case
described in this report, NA not available, MGUS monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance Corticosteroids are usually necessary
for treatment. Topical steroids and adequate treatment often lead in most cases to full recovery, but a small portion of patients only
respond well to systemic use of steroids [8, 14]. No deterioration of osteoporosis has been reported to be related with steroid treatment.
Further use of bisphosphonates is not fully contraindicated. From our review of previous reports, in five patients given zoledronic acid
with or without the protection of steroids, no additional ocular problems were reported [4, 12, 20]. Pamidronate was also prescribed to
another patient, and a tolerance effect was also observed with a prior combination of steroids . Interestingly, our patient developed
uveitis soon after administration of intravenous zoledronate after a 2-year tolerance to oral alendronate. This is the first report of ZAIU
after long-term alendronate tolerance. Patel et al. retrospectively reported that 0.8 % of postmenopausal women with osteopenia receiving
zoledronate developed mild to severe anterior acute uveitis . More recently, the incidence of ZAIU was prospectively reported to be 1.1 %
[95 % confidence interval (CI) 0.5–2.1] in a secondary analysis of a randomized controlled trial of early postmenopausal women . Regarding
oral bisphosphonates, a retrospective cohort study reported the incidence rate to be 29/10,000 person-years for uveitis in 10,827 first time
users . The true incidence might be higher, because some mild to moderate patients may fail to seek treatment. APR is the most frequent
adverse event after bisphosphonate use, usually including fever, fatigue, nasopharyngitis, musculoskeletal pain, and gastrointestinal
symptoms. All APR components had a peak onset within 1 day, and the median duration of the APR was 3 days . Recently, acute uveitis is being
considered as part of APR after bisphosphonate dispensing, due to its similar time of occurrence [4, 8]. Bisphosphonates have been shown to
share homologies with γ/δ T-cell ligands by stimulating cytokine release by γ/δ lymphocytes, and by inhibiting farnesyl diphosphate synthase
to increase the intracellular accumulation of isopentenyl pyrophosphate . These activities may contribute to the development of APR and
uveitis. Reid et al. investigated 7,765 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis, using a stepwise logistic regression analysis, and showed
that APRs were less common in smokers, diabetics, calcitonin users, and previous oral bisphosphonate users . Because uveitis is a part of
APR, it seems to develop less frequently after oral bisphosphonate tolerance, as described in our case study. Additional and larger case
studies and single case reports are still needed to confirm the risk factors of ZAIU after previous bisphosphonate use. We report a case of
ZAIU with macular edema after long-term oral alendronate tolerance. ZAIU is beginning to be accepted as part of APR due to the similar time
of occurrence. Endocrinologists and ophthalmologists should be aware of this drug reaction, in cases of deterioration of ocular symptoms and
the inappropriate use of antibiotics and antiviral agents. Prior oral alendronate may not entirely prevent ZAIU. Steroids are usually
necessary in the treatment of ZAIU, and systemic steroids are sometimes indicated. The readministration of bisphosphonate is not fully
contraindicated, but according to the available evidence prior steroid protection may be a more reasonable treatment strategy. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Optical coherence tomography Zoledronic acid induced uveitis Acute phase
reaction Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance National Osteoporosis Foundation Competing interests The authors’ declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YT: drafted the manuscript and critically revised it for important intellectual
content. RW, QL, and FY: in made the final diagnosis of the patient, and revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual
content. LL: and CM: performed the systemic steroids treatment on the patient, and made substantial contributions to the acquisition of
data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information Lianyuan Liu used to be a clinical doctor of the First
Hospital of Qinhuangdao, now he is Chief of Liaison Office. The authors would like to thank Dr. Dongni Yang for ophthalmological
adjudication. None of the authors has received any funding related to this manuscript.
