To the Editor: Carotid body tumor (CBT) is a highly vascular neoplasm of neural crest origin arising in paraganglial cells of the carotid
bifurcation. Branches from external carotid artery or glomic artery arising at the bifurcation of common carotid artery dominate in the
blood supply mode. Only very few cases with supplementary blood supply from an internal carotid artery (ICA) have been reported in
literature, but were still short of imaging proof. Here, we report an extremely rare case of CBT with blood supply from ICA, which had been
performed 4 times of unaccomplished surgical explorations before the tumor was excised during the 5th time of surgery. She also presented
carotid sinus syndrome that was also extremely rare among CBT patients. A 52-year-old woman was admitted to the Department of Otolaryngology
Head and Neck Surgery with a history of neck mass on the right side for 25 years and 4 times of surgical explorations. She felt dizziness
when the mass had grown for 20 years, experienced palpitation and vomiting once 5 years ago when she was working in the field, faintness and
falling to the bed twice at later time, but never had vertigo. Physical examination revealed a mass sized 8 cm Ã— 10 cm in the right neck.
Enhanced computed tomography (CT) angiography and digital subtraction angiography demonstrated a mass located at carotid bifurcation with
rich blood supply germinated from ICA stump, the distal end of ICA was almost obstructed [Figure 1a and 1b]. Routine electrocardiogram
revealed no abnormalities. Matas test was unable to be carried out because the tumor was so large, extending from the right skull base to
the supraclavicular fossa, which made a tangible compression infeasible, while balloon occlusion test proved that a temporary 30 min
occlusion of ICA brought about no significant symptoms and signs of neurological or sensorimotor system, preoperative embolization was not
routinely carried out. During surgery, the internal jugular vein, vagus nerve, hypoglossal nerve and sympathetic trunk were preserved. The
ICA and external carotid arteries were hard to free from surrounding tissues, and a carotid artery bypass was also not easy to put into the
carotid artery. When the ICA was cut across, the blood oozed out very slow rather than ejaculated [Figure 1c]. Based on the occlusion test
results, the carotid arteries including internal, external and common carotid artery were ligated. The patient was followed for 2 years and
was found to be free from previous dizziness or faintness. A temporary choking that presented before surgery lasted for half an year after
surgery, permanent right vocal cord paralysis and slight ptosis on the right side were also observed. The postoperative CT angiography and
cervical vascular duplex demonstrated no further significant abnormality though interruption of the carotid artery persisted. Medical
imaging and operative field: (a) enhanced computed tomography demonstrating highly vascular neoplasm in the right neck; (b) digital
subtraction angiogram demonstrating rich blood supply germinated from the stump of right internal carotid artery (black triangle), instead
of branches of external carotid artery (black arrow); (c) operative field demonstrating stumps of the lacerated common carotid artery,
external carotid artery (black triangle) and blood-oozing internal carotid artery (black arrow). CBTs are asymptomatic in the majority of
cases. In rare instances, they may cause vague symptoms related to the compression of the nerves of the region. The clinical symptoms
characteristic of a carotid sinus syndrome (i.e., repeated fainting and falling), which are believed to be associated with carotid sinus
nerve or Hering's nerve, in turn, a branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve, if disappear after the surgical removal of the tumor, constitute a
unique case. The blood supply of this CBT is mainly derived from ICA, which is quite different from usual cases. Did the repeated surgery
change the blood supply of the tumor? We could suppose that the peripheral vascular branches might be ligated during the repeated surgical
exploration, then new blood supply might grow either from the external or ICA. If most of the branches from external carotid artery were
interrupted, which in turn made the main part of the tumor keep attached to the ICA, new blood vessels derived from ICA become possible,
then the tumor ends up with the major blood supply from ICA with the tumor growth and erosion into the ICA. Nil. There are no conflicts of
interest. Edited by: Li-Shao Guo
