Academic Editor: Liudmila Korkina Here we have collected evidence suggesting that chronic changes in the NO homeostasis and the rise of
reactive oxygen species bioavailability can contribute to cell dysfunction in Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) patients. We report
that peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), derived from a female LHON patient with bilateral reduced vision and carrying the
pathogenic mutation 11778/ND4, display increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS), as revealed by
flow cytometry, fluorometric measurements of nitrite/nitrate, and 3-nitrotyrosine immunodetection. Moreover, viability assays with the
tetrazolium dye MTT showed that lymphoblasts from the same patient are more sensitive to prolonged NO exposure, leading to cell death. Taken
together these findings suggest that oxidative and nitrosative stress cooperatively play an important role in driving LHON pathology when
excess NO remains available over time in the cell environment. Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a mitochondrial disorder
leading to severe visual impairment, due to retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) death and atrophy with demyelination of the optic nerve . The
primary cause of the disease is a mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) mutation leading to a single amino acid substitution in one of the
mitochondrially encoded subunits of NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, complex I of the electron transport chain (ETC). The most common
mutations are at positions 11778/ND4, 3460/ND1, and 14484/ND6 [2, 3]. LHON pathology generally occurs in the second or third decade of life
and affects predominantly males . The only clinically relevant phenotype in most of the patients is RGCs loss, seldom accompanied by other
complicating neurological disorders, such as dystonia, multiple sclerosis- (MS-) like illness parkinsonism, cerebellar ataxia, and myoclonus
, pointing to a diffused mitochondrial energetic failure. Interestingly, a higher risk of developing MS in women with clinically established
LHON has been reported . Rarely other phenotypes have been described, such as chronic renal failure [9, 10], involving as common feature
tissues/cells that are exquisitely energy dependent and require adequate supply of reducing substrates and O2 to sustain mitochondrial
adenosine-5′-triphosphate (ATP) production. All LHON mutations induce an impairment of mitochondrial function. A decline in complex
I-sustained cell respiration and ATP production has been reported in assays performed on isolated mitochondria derived from muscle, Epstein-
Barr Virus- (EBV-) transformed leukocytes, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), and cybrids . Based on these specific defects,
experiments carried out on patient's tissues and cell models of the disease showed an overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and an
increased propensity to apoptotic cell death . Nevertheless, LHON cells seem to be able to cope with the ETC dysfunction, maintaining
apparently a normal growth and total cellular ATP level, yet being more vulnerable to metabolic/oxidative stress or other stressful
conditions [2, 17]. Consistently, a recently developed mouse model revealed, together with some of the key histopathological features
typically observed in LHON patients, the decrease of complex I activity, respiratory defects, and the increase in ROS levels, but no
reduction in ATP synthesis, pointing to oxidative stress as the major driver of the pathology . On these bases, most of therapeutic
approaches to LHON, and generally to mitochondrial disorders, currently rely on the use of mitochondrial substrates, together with redox
active effectors and free radical scavengers. Idebenone, curcumin, and vitamins C and E as well as other antioxidant compounds have been
used separately or combined in “cocktails” customized for the individual patients [19, 20], all treatments unfortunately with limited
success. Under severe pathological conditions, such as inflammation or sepsis, a disruption of the homeostatic control of oxygen supply and
utilization has been observed, accompanied by ROS formation, together with an imbalance of nitric oxide (NO) production and breakdown.
Nitric oxide produced either enzymatically by nitric oxide synthases (NOSs) or directly via the reduction of bulk nitrite at low pH is a
fundamental second messenger involved in a number of pathophysiological processes , inducing detrimental or cytoprotective effects depending
on its concentration and localization . Importantly, NO regulates mitochondrial respiration by reversibly binding to cytochrome c oxidase
and limiting O2 consumption, while extending O2 gradients in tissues [25, 26]. Such inhibition is more effective in actively respiring cells
and at low oxygen concentration . Under conditions associated with increased ROS levels, NO participates in reactions with other reactive
species to generate secondary products that can impair mitochondrial function. Particularly, the reaction of NO and superoxide anion (O2−∙),
leading to the formation of toxic peroxynitrite (ONOO−), is very rapid (diffusion limited) and known to induce macromolecular damage,
including nitration and inactivation of mitochondrial proteins . Although many biochemical aspects of LHON have been elucidated, the role of
NO in the LHON disease has not been investigated yet. Interestingly, an increased immunoreactivity for inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) has been detected in macrophages and in the microglia of demyelinated lesions in the brain white matter of a LHON female patient,
suggesting an early immunological mechanism in addition to the primary degeneration of the optic nerve . In this patient, administration of
corticosteroids improved visual and neurological function. This observation suggests that increased NO levels, as those produced by iNOS, in
combination with ROS overproduction can result into mitochondrial defects, eventually triggering severe cell dysfunctions. Here, we tested
this hypothesis on PBMCs and lymphoblasts derived from a female LHON patient with bilateral reduced vision and immunological disorders. We
found that the cells, although carrying the pathogenic mutation 11778/ND4, are still endowed with a suitable bioenergetic apparatus,
producing ATP, thus well compensating complex I mutation. However, lymphoblasts proved to be more susceptible to NO toxicity, suggesting
that the mitochondrial genetic defect, via the enhancement of the basal ROS levels, potentiates the formation of secondary reactive nitrogen
species (RNS), particularly ONOO−, leading to reduced cell viability. RPMI-1640 medium, fetal bovine serum (FBS), and nonessential amino
acid solution were from Sigma-Aldrich and Invitrogen Life Technologies (GIBCO). Thiazolyl blue tetrazolium bromide (MTT) was from Sigma-
Aldrich and (Z)-1-diazen-1-ium-1,2-diolate (DETA-NONOate) was purchased from Cayman Chemicals. The proband is 34-year-old woman with a
previous diagnosis of autoimmune thyroiditis. When she was 28 years old, she suffered a sudden and painful loss of vision in OS and after
two weeks in OD, accompanied by xerophthalmia. Visual field showed retinal sensibility reduction, especially at superior areas, whereas
fluoroangiography was normal. She was treated with high doses of corticosteroids and intravenous immunoglobulins without benefits. Brain MRI
scan was unremarkable. After 4 months, plasmapheresis was performed with little improvement, so it was decided to start cyclophosphamide
treatment. This treatment was carried on for 6 months without any benefit. In the meantime, after a femur fracture due to an accidental
fall, a severe osteoporosis was diagnosed. After one year from the visual loss, a workout for autoimmune disorders gave positive ANA
(speckled pattern, 1 : 160) and the presence of anti-Ro/SSA. Cytochemical, bacteriological, viral, and immunoelectrophoretic analyses on
cerebrospinal fluid were normal. Brainstem auditory evoked responses, along with motor and somatosensory evoked potentials, were normal,
while visual evoked potentials could not be performed due to bilateral visual loss. A new brain and orbital and spinal cord MRI scan showed
bilateral callosal, periventricular, and paratrigonal white matter symmetric hyperintensities on T2-weighted images without contrast
enhancement on T1. No alterations were found at the level of the spinal cord and optic nerves. On admission to our neurological division,
bilateral visual acuity was 1/10. We excluded neoplastic or paraneoplastic processes by full-body CT scan and screening for antibodies
associated with paraneoplastic syndromes. The infectious aetiology was also discarded after negative hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus, HIV,
EBV, cytomegalovirus serology, and tuberculin skin test. Neuromyelitis optica, carential, metabolic, and endocrinological disorders were
also excluded. The standard genetic screening for LHON disease showed the presence of 11778/ND4 mutation. She began ubidecarenone therapy
(600 mg/day) without any subjective or measurable improvement of visual acuity. After two months she developed Escherichia coli
pyelonephritis and chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis was diagnosed. After one year and a half from the visual loss, the patient presented
a bilateral visual acuity worsening with a severe headache and hypoesthesia at four limbs. A brain MRI showed a massive extension of
bilateral paratrigonal white matter lesions with an involvement of bilateral occipital subcortical white matter and increased signal
intensity on T2-weighted images of optical radiations and retrochiasmatic optic tracts. After one month, brain MRI with contrast and
diffusion weighted imaging was repeated showing an additional enlargement of bilateral occipital lesions with positivity in DWI sequence and
a circled enhancement. Therefore she was admitted again to our division and a hemogasanalysis proved a severe metabolic acidosis (pH 7.14,
pCO2 = 13 mmHg, pO2 = 145 mmHg, sO2 = 98.5%, HCO3− = 4.40 mmol/L, BE = −22.40 mmol/L, and BEecf = −24.60). Blood lactate measurements showed
an abnormal increase during exercise (at rest 13.69 mg/dL; after 5-minute exercise 48.13 mg/dL; after 10-minute exercise 65.53 mg/dL; after
15-minute exercise 85.57 mg/dL; 15 minutes after the end of exercise 59.28 mg/dL; and normal value 4.5–19.8). Blood analysis showed a renal
injury associated with nephrocalcinosis diagnosed by ultrasonography and CT scan. During the hospitalization the medical care focused on the
improvement of electrolyte balance and renal injury until values normalization. Simultaneously, by brain MRI scan, we appreciated a clear
reduction of white matter lesions and contrast enhancement absence. Blood samples were obtained from the case report and from three matched
(age, sex, and geographical origin) healthy controls. The local Institutional Review Board approved the study and all participating subjects
gave written informed consent. PBMCs were obtained by density centrifugation over Ficoll-Hypaque according to standard procedures. Genomic
DNA was extracted from PBMCs using a commercial kit (QIAamp DNA Mini Kit, Qiagen). Purified PBMCs (5 × 104 cells/well) were seeded in
96-flat well plates and cultured in 200 μL/well RPMI-1640 medium, supplemented with 20% FBS (HyClone), 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL
penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. Lymphoblast cell lines were established from peripheral blood PBMCs of the patient and the three
healthy controls by EBV infection. The mutational analysis of the patient mtDNA was performed by PCR, restriction analysis, and
electrophoresis and confirmed by sequencing (Sanger method). Both PBMCs and lymphoblast cell lines derived from the LHON patient and
controls were grown in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 20% (v/v) heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL
penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 1X nonessential amino acids. Cells were cultured in 25 cm2 or 75 cm2 flasks or in multiwell plates
and incubated at 37°C under standard conditions [5% CO2; 95% relative humidity]. Viable-cell counting was carried out using the Trypan blue
dye exclusion test (Sigma-Aldrich). Oxygen consumption in intact PBMCs derived from the LHON patient and controls was measured using a high
resolution respirometer (2k-Oxygraph, OROBOROS Instruments). Data acquisition and analysis were carried out using the software Datalab
(OROBOROS Instruments). Control and LHON PBMCs were collected, washed with sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS), counted, and suspended
in DMEM containing 1 g/L glucose. Cells, at a final density ranging from 7 to 9 × 106 cells/mL, were incubated in the 2k-Oxygraph chambers
at 37°C for 30 min to allow temperature and pH equilibration. Respiration was evaluated under basal metabolic conditions, thus sustained by
endogenous substrates. After recording an oxygen consumption rate (OCR) baseline, 4 μM antimycin A (AA) was added to the chamber in order to
inhibit cytochrome c reductase (complex III) and stop mitochondrial respiration. Data were recorded at sampling intervals of 2 s. Cellular
concentration of ATP was measured by chemiluminescence, under stationary conditions. Cells were incubated overnight in antibiotic/FBS-free
DMEM medium. Steady-state ATP levels were measured in LHON and control PBMCs (3 × 105 cells/mL) 4 h after resuspending the cells in PBS
containing L-glutamine (2 mM), in the presence of glucose (2 g/L) or its absence to stimulate OXPHOS; when necessary, oligomycin (2.5 μg/mL)
was added over the last 1.5 h of incubation. Synthesized ATP was measured using the ATPlite 1step kit (PerkinElmer) in a luminometer (VICTOR
Multilabel Counter, PerkinElmer, USA) equipped with 96-well plates. To measure the intracellular ROS concentration, the fluorescent probe
2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFDA, Sigma-Aldrich) was used. PBMCs from the LHON patient and controls were incubated for 30 min at
37°C in the dark in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10 μM DCFDA. Afterwards, cells were washed twice with Hank's Buffered Salt Solution (HBSS)
supplemented with calcium and magnesium, as suggested by the manufacturer, collected, and analysed immediately by flow cytometry (BD Accuri
C6); ROS levels were estimated from the mean fluorescence intensity. The green fluorescence was measured using the FL-1 setting (log mode)
after having gated out cell debris. In each experiment 10.000 events were recorded. The content in 3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT) modified proteins
was used as marker of protein damage by ONOO−. The intracellular 3-NT levels were assessed colorimetrically using a competitive ELISA kit
(Abcam). For each independent experiment a standard curve was generated with the provided 3-NT standard and the 3-NT content quantified. NOx
concentration in cell supernatants was determined fluorimetrically using Fluorimetric Assay Kit (Cayman Chemical), 48 h after cells seeding.
After 48 h incubation in presence or absence of the NO donor DETA-NONOate, the viability of lymphoblast cells was assessed using the MTT
[-3(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] reduction assay as described in . Briefly, cells (2 × 105/mL) were seeded in
a 96-well plate and incubated for 48 h at 37°C in the presence of increasing DETA-NONOate concentrations (0.01–0.5 mM) in a final volume of
100 μL/well. Having a half-life of 20 h at 37°C, the NO donor was readded after 24 h. At the end of the 48 h incubation, 10 μL of MTT
solution (5 mg/mL) was added to each well, followed by 4 h incubation at 37°C. Afterwards, in order to dissolve the dark-coloured formazan
crystals produced by reduction of the MTT tetrazolium salt, cells were incubated at 37°C overnight with 100 μL of 10% sodium dodecyl
sulphate (SDS) in 0.01 M HCl. The optical density of reduced MTT was measured at 570 nm with a reference wavelength at 690 nm using
Appliskan Microplate Reader (Thermo Scientific). The experiments were carried out in triplicate. Data are reported as mean ± SEM of at least
three independent experiments and significance (P) was determined using Student's t-test. P values ≤ 0.05 were considered significant. RGCs,
brain, and kidneys, the most affected sites in the LHON patient, are all high-energy demanding, so they rely more on OXPHOS ATP.
Importantly, PBMCs have a metabolism mainly sustained by OXPHOS [33, 34] and therefore represent a good model to be investigated in the
present study. Figure 1(a) shows a typical oxygen consumption trace acquired with intact PBMCs. The oxygen consumption was sustained by
endogenous substrates and relied almost completely on mitochondria, as it was almost completely inhibited by antimycin A, a specific
inhibitor of cytochrome c reductase. After normalization to the protein content, we found the O2 consumption rate (≈50 pmol O2 s−1 mg−1) to
be very similar in both LHON and control cells. In agreement with these data, no significant differences in the steady-state concentration
of ATP were observed in control and patient PBMCs. ATP levels were evaluated either in the absence or in the presence of glucose to sustain
glycolysis and using oligomycin to inhibit OXPHOS activity. When glucose was present (Figure 1(b)), both LHON and control cells displayed a
similar ATP content (ATPTOTAL ≈ 6 μg ATP/mg total protein), and oligomycin inhibition of OXPHOS was found poorly effective in control and
LHON PBMCs, suggesting that both cell types possess an efficient glucose-dependent glycolytic compensation (Warburg effect). Without glucose
(Figure 1(c)), both LHON and control cells showed ~20% decrease in the ATP content, whose concentration dropped dramatically in the presence
of oligomycin. Under the latter conditions, the glycolytic contribution is minimal and the difference between the ATP measured in the
presence and absence of oligomycin (ΔATP) is indicative of the ATP generated by OXPHOS (ATPOXPHOS). The ATPOXPHOS/ATPTOTAL ratio (Figure
1(d)) is very similar in LHON and control cells, indicating that the mutation does not affect OXPHOS efficiency. Taken together, these
results suggest that, over and above a bioenergetic deficit imputable to complex I mutation, other molecular mechanisms contribute to the
clinical onset of LHON and its progress that we hypothesize to be also related to increased cell levels of reactive oxygen and nitrogen
species. In order to investigate whether the PBMCs derived from the LHON patient displayed increased oxidative/nitrosative stress levels, we
measured the amount of ROS and 3-NT under basal conditions. The latter is an important marker of RNS, including ONOO−. We found that LHON
PBMCs display a significant 1.4-fold increase in ROS production compared to controls (Figure 2(a)). Consistently, LHON PBMCs displayed a
higher concentration of 3-NT, suggesting a role of NO chemistry in cellular stress (Figure 2(b)). To assess the basal NO level in LHON, we
measured the concentration of nitrite/nitrate, the oxidation products of NO. Interestingly we found that the nitrite/nitrate levels (Figure
2(c)) tend to increase compared to controls, although the reported variation did not reach statistical significance. Owing to a limited
availability of biological samples (cells from patient) and in order to obtain larger amounts of starting material, EBV-transformed
lymphoblasts were used for further cell biochemical analysis. The bioenergetic behaviour of primary and transformed cells was very similar,
with the two cell types displaying superimposable mitochondrial parameters (data not shown). A chronic increase in NO levels was
artificially mimicked using the NO donor DETA-NONOate (DETA-NO). Cell viability was examined in both LHON and control lymphoblasts after
48 h incubation with different amounts of the NO releaser. As a regulator of cell proliferation, NO can either enhance or inhibit cell
growth depending on its concentration. Figure 3 shows that at 10 μM DETA-NO no cytotoxicity was associated with NO exposure. Higher
concentrations of DETA-NO affected cell viability proportionally to the amount added. However, the decline in cell viability was
significantly larger in LHON than in control cells: at 0.1 and 0.5 mM DETA-NO, the residual viability of LHON cells was 35% and 15%,
respectively, while in control cells it was, respectively, 75% and 35%. Trypan blue exclusion assays, carried out under comparable
experimental conditions, indicated a similar cellular behaviour (data not shown), showing that LHON cells are more susceptible to
nitrosative stress than control cells. LHON is characterized by a low penetrance, as most individuals carrying mtDNA mutations remain
asymptomatic, with a limited subset of them expressing the disease. Age and gender are the most important risk factors, with approximately
30–50% of males and 10–20% of female LHON mutation carriers becoming symptomatic at a median age of 19 years (range 5–56 years) . Indeed,
genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors all contribute to the onset and evolution of the disease . Complex I mutation, the primary
etiologic cause of LHON, despite being a necessary determinant of the pathology, is not sufficient to induce the clinical expression of the
disease so that a convincing explanation for the pathogenesis of this disorder is still under debate. The impairment of bioenergetics
parameters, such as cell respiration and ATP production, has been found absolutely modest both in patient's tissues and in cell models of
the disease. On the contrary, a marked overproduction of ROS has been reported, together with a low capability of the cellular antioxidant
machinery to maintain the redox homeostasis. LHON cybrid models have shown lower levels of glutathione peroxidase, glutathione reductase,
and Mn-superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) or total glutathione, compared to controls [37, 38], particularly after cell treatment to enhance their
OXPHOS dependency. These observations strongly support the idea that the genetic alteration of complex I, over and above the simple action
on primary mitochondrial parameters, induces an alteration of the cell redox-signalling and homeostasis. Interestingly, in a cybrid model
carrying the G11778A/ND4 mutation, it has been observed that mitochondrial overexpression of MnSOD induces a decrease in superoxide levels
and enhances cell survival . While chronic oxidative stress has been shown to play an important role in the onset of the disease, the role
of NO and related reactive species remained unexplored. Together with CO and H2S, NO forms the gasotransmitter triad acting as a redox-
signalling regulator of several physiological functions, the mitochondrial one included . NO, particularly at low concentrations, protects
against cell death , whereas in the presence of superoxide it becomes toxic by forming ONOO− . It should be kept in mind, however, that,
even in the absence of ONOO−, depending on the electron flux level through the respiratory chain, that is, on the concentration of
mitochondrial ferrocytochrome c, and particularly under low O2 tension (hypoxia), inhibition of mitochondrial complex IV by NO can be severe
and persistent [29, 45, 46]. According to our results, LHON cells are apparently more prone to such NO-dependent detrimental chemistry. We
present here the case of a female patient with a point mutation at nucleotide position G11778A, who suffered from both eyes' visual loss and
subsequently displayed markers for autoimmune disorders, as well as white matter alterations outside the visual system. We show that PBMCs
and lymphoblasts derived from our patient are more susceptible not only to oxidative but also to nitrosative stress. In these cells we found
that, under metabolic basal conditions and in the absence of exogenous NO, the 3-NT levels are enhanced. This finding is in agreement with
prior studies carried out on optic nerve and retinal histological specimens obtained from LHON patients and on synaptosomes from a mouse
model of the disease that have evidenced increased levels of 3-NT [18, 47]. The higher basal 3-NT concentration suggests that LHON cells
produce larger amounts of nitrosating agents, such as ONOO−. Consistently, we found that the concentration of nitrite/nitrate, the oxidation
products of NO, tends to increase in patient cells, compared to controls. Increase in nitrosative stress might be particularly likely when
NO overproduction takes place. The current study reveals that chronic exposure to NO in proband lymphoblasts carrying the 11778/ND4 mutation
determines a significant decrease in cell viability compared to controls, suggesting that in this pathological state the NO chemistry is
more active. Interestingly, our patient has shown an abnormal increase in lactate serum levels after exercise, suggesting a limited
mitochondrial reserve capacity. In terms of energy metabolism, under basal conditions the patient PBMCs are able to fully compensate complex
I mutation allowing an efficient mitochondrial function. We observed that the ATP levels in LHON cells were not significantly different from
those ones of control cells, even when the glycolytic system was restricted by glucose deprivation. Both cell types were equally able to
efficiently compensate OXPHOS defects with glycolysis, as shown by abolishing the contribution of ATPOXPHOS with oligomycin. Mitochondrial
ATP generation is crucial for cell function; therefore mitochondria have evolved several different strategies to maintain it to face
dysfunctions. Switching to glycolysis is fundamental for cell survival during acute stress, although this pathway represents a much less
efficient mode of ATP production, resulting in an energy deficit and acidosis over long periods, especially in those cells relying on high-
energy demand. Cells derived from LHON carriers, having the mitochondrial mutation but not expressing the disease, were shown to adopt
different responses that allow the maintenance of the respiratory function and ATP levels, such as increasing the activity of the succinate-
dependent pathway or the mitochondrial mass [13, 48]. The bioenergetic compensation observed in individuals affected by LHON can be
disrupted by various factors, such as the frequently suggested nuclear modifying genes and environmental triggers. Smoking and alcohol are
both known to decrease the mitochondrial reserve capacity and have been reported to play a role in the onset of LHON disease also
contributing to its incomplete penetrance. A loss of mitochondrial reserve capacity, as obtained by the chronic exposure to NO, decreases
the ability to respond to endogenous secondary energetic stressors, such as ROS and RNS, which we observed to be increased in the patient
PBMCs. All together these findings point to a novel role played by RNS, particularly ONOO−, whose accumulation in LHON cells appears to have
a role in the pathology and its pharmacological control may be important in the patients . In conclusion, we show that lymphoblasts derived
from a LHON patient carrying the 11788/ND4 mutation are more susceptible to NO, suggesting that the exposure to high NO concentrations could
impair in vivo the ability to cope with the oxidative stress caused by the genetic defect, thereby driving the pathology. This unprecedented
observation is consistent with both LHON cell and animal models pointing to oxidative stress and impairment of redox homeostasis as
important factors contributing to the onset and progression of the disease. Further work is needed to extend these studies to other LHON
cells or tissues in order to better understand the reciprocal role of ROS and RNS in this pathology and to design new drugs and appropriate
therapeutic approaches. This work was partly supported by Ministero dell'Istruzione, dell'Università e della Ricerca of Italy (PRIN
20107Z8XBW_005 and FILAS-RU-2014-1020(05.03.2014) to Paolo Sarti, PNR-CNR Aging Program 2012–2014 to Alessandro Giuffrè). The authors are
particularly thankful to Fabio Libi for assistance in culturing LHON and control cells. The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interests regarding the publication of this paper. Micol Falabella and Elena Forte contributed equally. Bioenergetic properties of 11778/ND4
mutated PBMCs. (a) Representative cell O2 consumption measurements. Black line: O2 concentration trace; red line: O2 consumption rate. After
recording basal respiration, 4 μM antimycin A (AA) was added. (b) Cellular ATP levels measured in the presence of glucose with and without
oligomycin. (c) Cellular ATP levels measured in the absence of glucose with and without oligomycin. (d) Fractional ATP expressed as the
ratio between ATPOXPHOS and ATPTOTAL. ATPOXPHOS was obtained from ΔATP (c) and ATPTOTAL was measured in the presence of glucose without
oligomycin (b). Data (mean ± SEM) were collected in three triplicate experiments on cells derived from the LHON patient and the three
healthy controls. Oxidative and nitrosative stress is increased in 11778/ND4 mutated PBMCs. (a) Intracellular ROS levels were measured using
the DCFDA dye. (b) The 3-NT content was determined by competitive ELISA and normalized to total protein. (c) Concentration of NOx (nitrite
and nitrate) in the cell supernatant as normalized to total protein. Data (mean ± SEM) collected in three duplicate experiments on cells
derived from the LHON patient and the three healthy controls. Values are considered significant when P < 0.05: ∗P ≤ 0.05; Ns: not
significant. NO impairs the viability of 11778/ND4 mutated lymphoblasts. The cells derived from the LHON patient and the three healthy
controls were treated with various concentrations of DETA-NONOate for 48 h and their viability was assessed using the MTT assay. Data are
shown as the percentage of cell viability measured in the absence of the NO releaser. Data acquired in three triplicate experiments are
expressed as mean ± SEM. Values are considered significant when P < 0.05: ∗P ≤ 0.05; ∗∗P ≤ 0.01.
