The incidence of cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases from atypical laryngeal carcinoids is approximately 20%. However, the pathogenesis
and natural history of, and prognostic factors for, the condition remain poorly understood. We reported a 54-year-old female presented with
cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases from atypical laryngeal carcinoid. Laryngoscopy revealed a 0.5 × 1.5-cm reddish mass on the laryngeal
surface of the epiglottis. Under general anesthesia, a biopsy sample was obtained via suspension laryngoscopy. Routine pathology revealed
atypical laryngeal carcinoid. Immunohistochemical staining of the sections of primary tumor was positive for cytokeratin, chromogranin A,
synaptophysin, hypoxia-inducible factor-1α, P53, and CD56. GLUT-1, p-Akt, and PI3K were negative. The Ki-67 index was 15%. Supraglottic
laryngectomy and selective right-neck dissection were performed. After 6 months, the patient complained of pain in the right wall of the
chest; multiple cutaneous and subcutaneous nodules were evident at that site and in the abdomen. An abdominal nodule was biopsied and
pathology revealed that the atypical metastatic carcinoid had metastasized to both cutaneous and subcutaneous areas of the abdomen.
Chemotherapy was then prescribed. Currently, the intrathecal drug delivery system remains in place. No local recurrence has been detected.
Furthermore, we systematically reviewed clinical manifestations of the disease, pathogenesis, prognostic factors, and treatment. The
metastasis rate (cutaneous and subcutaneous) was approximately 12.2%. Thirty patients (62.5%) with cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases
exhibited contemporaneous lymph node invasion. The 3-, 5-, and 10-year survival rates were 44.0%, 22.0%, and 13.0%, respectively. The
prognosis of patients with atypical laryngeal carcinoids was poor. Relevant prognostic factors included the level of p53, human papilloma
virus status, certain hypoxic markers, and distant metastasis. No optimal treatment for such metastases has yet been defined. Laryngeal
neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs) are rare, constituting <1% of all tumors of the larynx. Four histological subtypes are distinguished based
on the extent of differentiation and cell size. Well and moderately differentiated NECs are termed typical and atypical carcinoids,
respectively. Poorly differentiated NCLs are divided into small- and large-cell NECs.1,2 The most frequent laryngeal NEC is the atypical
carcinoid, followed by small-cell NEC, carcinoid tumor, and large-cell NEC.3 The prognosis of laryngeal NEC varies by histopathological
type.2 A meta-analysis of 436 patients with laryngeal NECs found that the 5-year disease-specific survival was 100% for patients with
typical carcinoids, 53% for those with atypical carcinoids, and 19% for those with small-cell carcinomas. Prognostic factors included
distant metastasis. An atypical carcinoid of the larynx is a more aggressive type of NEC, often associated with multiple distant
metastases.4,5 Metastatic sites include the cervical and distant lymph nodes, lung, bones, skin, subcutaneous tissues, mediastinum, liver,
heart, pancreas, diaphragm, peritoneum, gastrointestinal tract, prostate, breast, brain, dura mater, pleura, testicles, and muscles.4 Lymph
node metastases are the most common (40%), followed by skin and subcutaneous metastases (20%), and metastases at other sites (40%).6–8 The
prognoses of patients with atypical laryngeal carcinoids are relatively poor; the 5-year survival rate is approximately 50%. Death is
usually caused by metastatic disease rather than local recurrence.4 Although the incidence of cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases from
atypical laryngeal carcinoids is approximately 20%, few systematic analyses of clinical manifestations or treatment of such metastases have
been reported. The precise means by which distant metastasis and local recurrence develop remain unclear, as do relevant prognostic factors.
To date, the only effective treatment appears to be surgery. The disease is refractory to chemotherapy, and any role for radiotherapy is
controversial.9 Thus, new treatments are required to improve long-term survival. Targeted therapies have recently been used to treat other
cancers,10,11 including NECs of other sites. Targets include vascular endothelial growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, and the
mammalian target of rapamycin; such treatments have improved the progression-free survival times of patients with pancreatic NEC, pulmonary
large-cell-type NEC, and prostate NEC.12–14 However, no report on targeted therapy of laryngeal NEC has yet been described. Our previous
study15 and additional work16 have shown that positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) detected high-level uptake of
-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG) by laryngeal NECs, as is also true of other head-and-neck cancers.17–20 Many studies have found that FDG
uptake is associated with overexpression of glucose transporter-1 (GLUT-1),20–23 which is associated with metastasis and poor prognosis of
many human cancers.22,24,25 NECs also express high levels of GLUT-126–28 with certain biological consequences.26 We previously found that
targeted inhibition of GLUT-1 decreased glucose uptake by, and inhibited proliferation of, Hep-2 cells,29 and enhanced the radiosensitivity
of laryngeal carcinoma Hep-2 cells.30 Thus, we proposed that GLUT-1 targeting may be useful for the treatment of laryngeal NECs. Here, we
report a patient exhibiting cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases from an atypical laryngeal carcinoid and review clinical manifestations,
possible pathogenesis, prognostic factors, and treatments. We measured the levels of GLUT-1 mRNA and protein, and screened for human
papilloma virus (HPV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV). A 54-year-old female presented with a sore throat and radiating
pain in the right ear lasting over 1 year in duration. She denied hoarseness, respiratory distress, dysphagia, and fever. Her past medical
history included hypertension during the 3 years prior, blood pressure was controlled by oral irbesartan (10 mg, per day). Laryngoscopy
revealed a 0.5 × 1.5-cm reddish mass on the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis (Figure 1). Movements of both vocal cords were normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 0.8 × 1.3-cm lesion in the epiglottis. T1-weighted imaging was isointense; T2-weighted imaging
hyperintense; and diffusion-weighted imaging of high signal intensity. The lesion underwent heterogeneous enhancement following
administration of gadolinium-DTPA (Figure 2). However, the preoperative PET/CT was not done. Laryngoscopy revealed a 0.5 × 1.5-cm reddish
mass on the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis. MRI revealed a 0.8 × 1.3-cm lesion in the epiglottis. T1-weighted imaging was isointense
(A), but T2-weighted imaging was hyperintense (B). diffusion-weighted imaging exhibited high signal intensity (C). The apparant diffusion
coefficient value was 0.741 × 10−3 mm2/s (D). The lesion exhibited heterogeneous enhancement (E). MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. The
institutional review board (IRB no.2015427) of The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University (Hangzhou City,
China) approved the present study. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient before inclusion. The process of the patient
received was listed in Table 1. Under general anesthesia, a biopsy sample was obtained via suspension laryngoscopy. Analysis of the frozen
section suggested that only a small-cell tumor was present; therefore, it was necessary to immunohistochemically differentiate a
myoepithelial tumor from an atypical carcinoma. Routine pathology revealed that the tumor cells were uniform in size, exhibited marked
heteromorphy, had an eosinophilic cytoplasm, and were arranged into nests and cords containing prominent blood sinuses. Immunohistochemical
staining of the sections of primary tumor was positive for cytokeratin, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α),
P53, and CD56. GLUT-1, p-Akt, and PI3K were negative. The Ki-67 index was 15% (Figure 3). These histopathological features confirmed the
presence of an atypical carcinoid. On May 7th 2014, supraglottic laryngectomy and selective right-neck dissection were performed under
general anesthesia (Figure 4). Postoperatively, the histopathological features of paraffin sections were confirmed to be those of an
atypical carcinoid; the right cervical lymph nodes and the resection margin were negative. The pathological diagnosis was pT2N0M0. The
postoperative course was uneventful; no surgical morbidity was evident. Postoperative radiotherapy was not scheduled. Timeline Pathology
revealed that the tumor cells were uniform in size, markedly heteromorphic with eosinophilic cytoplasm, and formed nests and cords
containing prominent blood sinuses (A) (HE × 200). Immunohistochemical staining was positive for hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) (B)
and p53 (C) (EliVision, ×200). Surgical section revealed a reddish lesion in the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis. The patient received
regular monthly follow-ups. On October 9th 2014, PET/CT revealed no recurrence or distant metastasis. In November 2014, the patient
complained of pain in the right wall of the chest; multiple cutaneous and subcutaneous nodules were evident at that site and in the abdomen
(Figure 5). An abdominal nodule was biopsied and pathology revealed that the atypical metastatic carcinoid had metastasized to both
cutaneous and subcutaneous areas of the abdomen. Chemotherapy was then prescribed (capecitabine, 100 mg orally/day and 150 mg orally/night,
days 1–14; and temozolomide, 300 mg orally/day, days 2–5). However, even after 2 cycles of chemotherapy, the nodules did not shrink in size
and, indeed, several new cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases developed. Pain was not resolved by chemotherapy but was relieved with oral
oxycontin. Another chemotherapy regime was then prescribed (octreotide, 30 mg intramuscularly, 1 dose). However, this did not control the
pain (scored using a visual analog scale as 6) from the multiple nodules. Pain was relieved with the aid of an intrathecal drug delivery
system (ropivacaine, 4 mL + ketamine, 60 mg + morphine, 160 mg; maintenance dose, 6 mg/day). On May 20th 2015, MRI revealed a metastasis in
the lumbar vertebrae. Hence, a new chemotherapeutic regime was prescribed (2 cycles: irinotecan, 350 mg/m2 by intravenous infusion); the
nodules did not respond. Currently, the intrathecal drug delivery system remains in place. No local recurrence has been detected. Multiple
cutaneous and subcutaneous nodules were evident in the right wall of the chest (A) and the abdomen (B). GLUT-1, HIF-1α, p-Akt, and PI3K mRNA
levels of frozen tissues of primary tumor and precancerous lesion (laryngeal papilloma) as control were measured using real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The results showed that the expression of GLUT-1, p-Akt, and PI3K mRNA was higher in the
atypical carcinoid than in precancerous lesion and in the laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (Figure 6). GLUT-1, HIF-1α, p-Akt, and PI3K
protein levels were analyzed using a BAC Protein Quantification Kit and Western blot analysis. The results showed that the expression of
GLUT-1, p-Akt, and PI3K proteins was higher in the atypical carcinoid and in the laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma than in precancerous
lesion; however, there is no difference in expression between in the atypical carcinoid and in the laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (Figure
7). HPV (16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 59, and 68 types), CMV, and EBV DNAs were detected by quantitative fluorescence PCR. During
the detection of HPV, H2O was used as a negative control and an immunodeficiency virus containing the target gene was the positive control.
During the detection of CMV, a CMV-negative sample was the negative control and HCMV AD-169 standard strain was the positive control. During
the detection of EBV, saline was the negative control and clinical isolates of the EB virus were the positive control. In all viral
detection assays, samples from healthy controls were also included. The results revealed that HPV, CMV, and EBV DNAs were negative. Each
primer sample was run in triplicate. RT-PCR showed that the expression of GLUT-1 (A), HIF-1α (B), p-Akt (C), and PI3K (D) mRNA were high
than these in precancerous lesion and laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma. Akt = protein kinase B, GLUT-1 = glucose transporter-1,
HIF-1α = hypoxia-inducible factor-1α, PI3K = phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, RT-PCR = reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
Western blot analysis showed that the expression of GLUT-1, HIF-1α, p-Akt, and PI3K proteins were high than these in precancerous lesion and
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma. Akt = protein kinase B, GLUT-1 = glucose transporter-1, HIF-1α = hypoxia-inducible factor-1α,
PI3K = phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. An atypical laryngeal carcinoid is the most common nonsquamous cell carcinoma of the larynx. The tumor
is aggressive and the prognosis relatively poor compared to a laryngeal carcinoid. However, the pathogenesis and natural history of, and
prognostic factors for, the condition remain poorly understood. Only 2 reports have explored HPV status in patients with laryngeal
NECs.31,32 Giordano et al (2009)31 found no HPV DNA in a patient with a moderately differentiated laryngeal NEC (an atypical carcinoid).
Halmos et al (2013)32 described 2 patients who were positive for the high-risk type of HPV (hrHPV) (1 atypical laryngeal carcinoid patient
was positive for HPV 18, and 1 patient with a laryngeal small-cell NEC was positive for HPV 16). Both patients experienced relatively good
outcomes compared to those of another 5 patients. It was therefore suggested that hrHPV involvement in laryngeal NECs may be associated with
good prognoses. We also detected hrHPV in our current patient. We were the first to explore CMV and EBV DNA status in patients with
laryngeal NECs. Such patients were negative for hrHPV, CMV, and EBV DNAs. Therefore, any relationship between laryngeal NEC and viral DNA
positivity requires further investigations in larger numbers of patients. Protein p53 is prognostic in terms of the outcomes of patients
with neuroendocrine tumors.33 Giordano et al (2009)31 reported p53 overexpression in a patient with a moderately differentiated laryngeal
NEC (an atypical carcinoid). Chung et al (2004)34 found that 3 of 6 patients with moderately differentiated laryngeal NECs were
p53-positive. McCluggage et al (1997)35 also reported that 3 atypical laryngeal carcinoid patients were p53-positive. Overholt et al
(1995)36 found that 6 of 8 patients with laryngeal neuroendocrine neoplasms (including 2 atypical carcinoids) were p53-positive. The cited
authors suggested that p53 mutation may be involved in the pathogenesis of atypical carcinoids.31,34–36 Our present patient is also
p53-positive. Hypoxic markers have been explored as possible prognostic factors for NECs, including atypical carcinoids. The markers
explored include GLUT-1, HIF-1α, and proteins of the associated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B (PI3K/Akt)
pathway.26–28,37–39 Ozbudak et al (2009)26 found that GLUT-1 was expressed in approximately half of all pulmonary NEC patients, and such
expression was associated with an increased risk of mortality. GLUT-1 expression is regulated by HIF-1α and the PI3K/Akt signaling
pathway.39 Hafner et al (2012)37 found that the PI3K/AKT pathway was activated in patients with Merkel cell carcinoma and suggested that the
pathway may represent a useful new therapeutic target. Kaira et al (2013)39 reported high-level immunohistochemical expression of GLUT-1,
HIF-1α, and p-Akt in 34 patients with pulmonary NECs. In addition, FDG uptake was associated with the expression of GLUT-1, HIF-1α, VEGF,
and CD34. The survival of patients positive for GLUT-1 was poorer than that of others.39 In our previous study, we found that GLUT-1,
HIF-1α, PI3K, and p-Akt were overexpressed in 10 patients with sinonasal and laryngeal small-cell NECs by 80%, 50%, 40%, and 40%,
respectively.27 Although the expression levels of GLUT-1, HIF-1α, PI3K, and p-Akt did not correlate with survival in a small patient series,
5 patients who died (100%) were positive for GLUT-1, and 2 (40%) for HIF-1α, PI3K, and p-Akt.27 Our present patient expressed high levels of
GLUT-1, HIF-1α, PI3K, and p-Akt mRNAs and proteins, as revealed by real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analysis, respectively. Thus, we
propose that targeting of hypoxic markers may effectively treat laryngeal NECs. Although the factors described above may influence
pathogenesis and survival, the utilities of such molecular markers require further study. Clinicopathological factors prognostic of
laryngeal NEC are well-understood; these include distant metastasis, a tumor diameter over 1 cm and tumor type.40,41 Patients with typical
laryngeal carcinoids have relatively good prognoses. All atypical laryngeal carcinoids, small-cell NECs and large-cell NECs, are associated
with poor outcomes.40 Of the latter 3 tumor types, atypical laryngeal carcinoid is the most common form of laryngeal NEC and exhibits a high
rate (67%) of distant metastasis.42,43 Soga (2003)43 analyzed 11,842 cases with carcinoids and variant endocarinomas, and found 199 cases of
atypical carcinoids in the larynx with a metastasis rate of 66.8%.43 Lymph node metastases were the most common (40%), followed by skin and
subcutaneous metastases (20%) and metastases to other sites (40%).6–8 Early in 1991, Woodruff and Senie44 reported that survival was reduced
when tumors triggered cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases. The cited authors reviewed 127 patients with atypical laryngeal carcinoids, 119
(94%) for whom follow-up data were available. Of these 119 patients, 22% developed skin or subcutaneous metastases.44 In 2005, Ferlito and
Rinaldo45 searched the English language literature and found nearly 350 cases of atypical laryngeal carcinoids.44 As of 10 years later (in
2015), no further systematic review on this tumor type or metastases thereof has been reported. In the study described herein, we reviewed
the English language literature using MEDLINE to run a PubMed/Web of Science search employing the keywords “neuroendocrine carcinoma or
atypical carcinoid or moderately differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma” with “head and neck or laryngeal or larynx” and “extrapulmonary
neuroendocrine carcinoma.” Goldman et al reported the 1st case of atypical laryngeal carcinoid in 1969. The patient also exhibited
widespread subcutaneous metastases. Since 2005, an additional 42 cases (including our present case) have been described (Table
2 ).9,32,41,46–55 Of these recent cases, 23 were males and 17 females; the genders of 2 were not specified. The male-to-female ratio was
thus approximately 1.4:1, lower than those reported by Woodruff and Senie (1991)44 and Ferlito et al (2005, 2006).42,45 The mean age of the
42 patients was 61 years (range, 38–85 years), and disease incidence peaked in the 5th (12 patients, 28.6%) and 6th (13 patients, 30.9%)
decades of life, unlike the data reported by Woodruff and Senie.44 Of all cases, 24 (57.1%) had histories of cigarette smoking. Of all
tumors, 35 (83.3%) were located in the supraglottic area, 1 (2.4%) in the glottis, 1 (2.4%) in the subglottis, and 4 at undefined laryngeal
sites. The main symptoms included sore throat (45.2%), dysphagia (40.5%), and hoarseness (23.8%). Of all patients, 35 (83.3%) received
surgery (11 underwent neck dissection), and 10 (28.6%) were prescribed postoperative treatments. Three (7.1%) received radiotherapy alone
and 3 (7.1%) received both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. One patient (2.4%) received chemotherapy only. Data on 42 New Cases Described in
the English Language Literature Since 2005 Data on 42 New Cases Described in the English Language Literature Since 2005 The surgical
procedures used included total and partial laryngectomy (7 cases were treated using CO2 lasers; the others underwent robotic partial
laryngectomy48). As concluded by Woodruff and Senie (1991)44 and Ferlito et al (2005, 2006),42,45 surgery remains the mainstream treatment
for atypical laryngeal carcinoid today. Recently, transoral robotic partial laryngectomy has become possible.48 The principal advantages of
robotic partial laryngectomy (compared to the traditional open approaches) are preservation of laryngeal function and elimination of the
need for permanent tracheostomy.48 However, such surgery is expensive and few hospitals have the sophisticated equipment required. Thus, CO2
laser treatment delivered under laryngomicroscopic guidance remains the principal surgical modality for the treatment of early-stage
atypical laryngeal carcinoid patients.9,32,41,49,55 Follow-up information was available for 39 (92.9%) of the 42 patients. Nineteen (48.7%)
developed regional recurrences, 12 (30.8%) distant metastases, and 6 (15.4%) both cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases. Overall, 11
patients (28.2%) remained alive and free of disease; 16 41.0%) died from the disease, 2 (5.1%) died from other diseases, 8 (20.5%) were
alive with disease, and 1 (2.6%) was lost to follow-up. The 5- and 10-year survival rates were 57.0% and 15.0%, respectively (Figure 8). The
5-year rate was similar to that reported by Woodruff and Senie (1991).44 However, the 10-year rate was lower than that reported by the cited
authors.44 We found that neither the treatment modality used nor the development of local recurrence affected outcomes (both P values
>0.05). The development of distant metastasis significantly (negatively) affected survival. The estimated mean survival time of patients
with distant metastases was poorer than that of others (102.0 vs 41.3 months, P < 0.01). The 5- and 10-year survival rates of 39 patients
diagnosed since our last review in 2005 were 57.0% and 15.0%, respectively. We found that the rates of cutaneous and subcutaneous metastasis
in these patients were lower (22%) than those reported by Woodruff and Senie (1991).44 We searched the English language literature for
information on cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases in such patients. We found data on 48 such patients (including our present case) (Table
3 ).6,8,32,34–36,40,44,54,56,57 To the best of our knowledge, approximately 392 cases of atypical laryngeal carcinoids have been reported in
the English language literature, combining the data of Ferlito et al42,45 with those of the present review. The frequency of metastasis in
such patients is approximately 12.2%; this incidence may fall as more data accumulate. Thirty patients (62.5%) with such metastases
exhibited contemporaneous lymph node invasion. Cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases were always accompanied by distant metastases to other
sites, including bone, lung, heart, liver, gallbladder, pancreas, bowel, kidney, ureter, testis, thyroid, diaphragm, and rectus muscle. The
principal symptom was pain. Of the 42 patients (87.5%) for whom follow-up data were available, the 3-, 5-, and 10-year survival rates were
44.0%, 22.0%, and 13.0%, respectively (Figure 9). Data on 48 Patients Described in the English Language Literature With Cutaneous and
Subcutaneous Metastases From Atypical Laryngeal Carcinoids Data on 48 Patients Described in the English Language Literature With Cutaneous
and Subcutaneous Metastases From Atypical Laryngeal Carcinoids The 3-, 5-, and 10-year survival rates of patients described in the English
language literature with cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases from atypical laryngeal carcinoids were 44.0%, 22.0%, and 13.0%,
respectively. No satisfactory treatment for cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases of atypical laryngeal carcinoids has yet been described.
Descriptions of treatments are rare.6,36,40,4,56,58,59 In 1989, Ferlito and Friedmann proposed that painful skin/subcutaneous metastases
should be treated surgically.44 van der Laan et al (2012) suggested that salvage surgery, including palliative metastasectomy, had an
important role in the treatment of laryngeal NEC. In addition, the overall survival level was reasonable. The cited authors described 3
patients with atypical laryngeal carcinoids who developed cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases; 1 died of disease 74 months after primary
treatment (total laryngectomy); 1 received miltefosine after metastasis was diagnosed and died of disease 28 months after primary treatment
(horizontal laryngectomy); and 1 underwent total laryngectomy after metastasis was diagnosed and was alive with disease 26 months after
primary treatment (supraglottic laryngectomy).41 Simpson et al (2009)7 reported on an 82-year-old patient who presented with multiple
exquisitely tender skin lesions. The patient had undergone resection of an atypical laryngeal carcinoid 33 years prior, and 2 further
endoscopic laser resections (with adjuvant radiotherapy) due to local recurrence 2 years prior. The multiple skin metastases were treated
using a CO2 laser; palliation was effective. However, the patient died from unrelated causes 8 months after the final presentation.6
Overholt et al (1995)36 described a patient with skin metastases who underwent chemotherapy. The patient died of disease 26 months after
primary treatment. It was thus suggested that chemotherapy was ineffective. Gripp et al (1995)58 used somatostatin to treat skin metastases
from atypical laryngeal carcinoids. However, the drug was no better than other chemotherapies.58 Electrochemotherapy is useful to palliate
cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases arising from some other malignant tumors.60 Such management included intravenous bleomycin
(15,000 IU/m2); the electrodes were placed under general anesthesia. The overall response rate was 66.6%. Patients with less than 10 nodules
and masses smaller than 2 cm in diameter benefited the most.60 In our present case, multiple cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases developed
6 months after supraglottic laryngectomy. The tested treatments were unsatisfactory. Pain was relieved only via intrathecal drug delivery.
In conclusion, atypical laryngeal carcinoids are rare, and the prognoses are poor. Prognostic factors include the level of p53, HPV status,
certain hypoxic markers, and distant metastasis. The rate of development of cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases was 12.2%. No optimal
treatment for such metastases has yet been defined. This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant
nos. 81172562 and 81372903). Abbreviations: CMV = cytomegalovirus, EBV = Epstein–Barr virus, FDG = -fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose, GLUT-1 =
glucose transporter-1, HIF-1α = hypoxia-inducible factor-1α, HPV = human papilloma virus, NEC = neuroendocrine carcinomas, PET/CT = positron
emission tomography/computed tomography, PI3K/Akt = phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B. The English in this document has been
checked by at least two professional editors, both native speakers of English. For a certificate, please see:
http://www.textcheck.com/certificate/3ocKWB. This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant nos.
81172562 and 81372903). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
