To the Editor: Kounis syndrome describes a group of symptoms that manifest as unstable vasospastic or nonvasospastic angina or as acute
myocardial infarction. It is triggered by the release of inflammatory mediators after an allergic reaction. A 74-year-old man with urinary
incontinence was treated with a radical cystectomy using the Mainz pouch procedure and ureteroscopic lithotripsy. He underwent the third
infusion of contrast agent (iopromide) for evaluation of pleural effusion in the right lower field of the lung. Two infusions of APCT with
IomeronÂ® (Iomeprol) contrast medium had previously been administered to this patient. The patient did not have a history of allergies or
cardiac issues, although he had previously experienced nausea and vomiting as a contrast agent side effect. In this case, the patient did
not complain of symptoms during infusion; however, he did lose consciousness after administration of the contrast agent. Initial heart
rhythm could not be measured, as an electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring system was not available at the time. Following transfer to the
emergency department, the patient was evaluated and found to be in a deep coma (Glasgow Coma Scale 3 ), with agonal gasping and pulseless
carotid and femoral arteries. The ECG revealed ST elevation in leads II, III, and aVF and ST depression in the precordial lead [Figure 1].
The patient's blood pressure and respiratory rate were not measured and temporary cardiopulmonary arrest occurred. He received basic
cardiopulmonary support and, as systolic blood pressure was unknown, an intravenous injection of 1 mg epinephrine, 4 mg chlorpheniramine,
and 125 mg methylprednisolone was administered. When evaluated approximately 5 min after collapse, spontaneous circulation and respiration
resumed. A cardiac echo examination was urgently performed and hyperkinetic wall motion was observed. After circulatory stabilization, the
patient was transferred to the coronary angiography room. No stenosis or obstruction was observed and the patient was diagnosed with
vasospasm caused by an allergic reaction to the contrast agent (Kounis syndrome Type I) and subsequently transferred to the Intensive Care
Unit. He did not experience any chest pain, ST elevation was not observed on the cardiogram, and creatine phosphokinase and troponin T did
not increase during his stay. The patient was discharged on the 5th hospital day. Electrocardiogram showing ST elevation in II, III, and aVF
leads, as well as ST depression in the precordial lead. Kounis syndrome is defined as the concurrence of acute coronary syndromes with
conditions associated with mast cellactivation, involving interrelated and interacting inflammatory cells, and includes allergic or
hypersensitive and anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions. Two types have been recently described: Type I includes patients with normal
coronary arteries and without predisposing factors for coronary artery disease, in whom acute allergic history induces cardiac dysfunction
with normal cardiac enzyme and troponin levels; while patients with preexisting atheromatous disease, in whom acute allergic insult may
result in plaque rupture or erosion exhibited as acute myocardial infarction, are classified as Type II. Type I could be an indication of
endothelial dysfunction or microvascular angina and treatment includes corticosteroids, antihistamines, and vasodilators. Type II patients
are treated by application of an acute coronary syndrome protocol and administration of corticosteroids, antihistamines, and vasodilators.
To the best of our knowledge, a case of cardiac arrest with ST elevation by contrast agent in a patient with no history of allergies or
cardiac problems (Kounis syndrome Type I) is extremely rare. Where cardiac arrest with ST elevation occurs after infusion of a contrast
agent in patients with no allergic or cardiac history, treatment with glucocorticoids, antihistamines, and epinephrine for the treatment of
Kounis syndrome Type I should be considered. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. Edited by: Xin Chen
