*These authors contributed equally to this work. Progressive Encephalopathy with oedema, Hypsarrhythmia and Optic atrophy (PEHO) is a rare,
neurodegenerative disorder of unknown aetiology. Nahorski et al. identify the first causative recessive mutation in CCDC88A, which encodes
the actin-binding protein Girdin. The phenotype and brain anatomy of the Ccdc88a knockout mouse resemble those of human PEHO syndrome.
Progressive Encephalopathy with oedema, Hypsarrhythmia and Optic atrophy (PEHO) is a rare, neurodegenerative disorder of unknown aetiology.
Nahorski et al. identify the first causative recessive mutation in CCDC88A, which encodes the actin-binding protein Girdin. The phenotype
and brain anatomy of the Ccdc88a knockout mouse resemble those of human PEHO syndrome. Progressive Encephalopathy with oedema,
Hypsarrhythmia and Optic atrophy (PEHO) is a rare, neurodegenerative disorder of unknown aetiology. Nahorski et al. identify the first
causative recessive mutation in CCDC88A, which encodes the actin-binding protein Girdin. The phenotype and brain anatomy of the Ccdc88a
knockout mouse resemble those of human PEHO syndrome. Progressive encephalopathy with oedema, hypsarrhythmia and optic atrophy (PEHO)
syndrome is a rare Mendelian phenotype comprising severe retardation, early onset epileptic seizures, optic nerve/cerebellar atrophy, pedal
oedema, and early death. Atypical cases are often known as PEHO-like, and there is an overlap with ‘early infantile epileptic
encephalopathy’. PEHO is considered to be recessive, but surprisingly since initial description in 1991, no causative recessive gene(s) have
been described. Hence, we report a multiplex consanguineous family with the PEHO phenotype where affected individuals had a homozygous
frame-shift deletion in CCDC88A (c.2313delT, p.Leu772*ter). Analysis of cDNA extracted from patient lymphocytes unexpectedly failed to show
non-sense mediated decay, and we demonstrate that the mutation produces a truncated protein lacking the crucial C-terminal half of CCDC88A
(girdin). To further investigate the possible role of CCDC88A in human neurodevelopment we re-examined the behaviour and neuroanatomy of
Ccdc88a knockout pups. These mice had mesial-temporal lobe epilepsy, microcephaly and corpus callosum deficiency, and by postnatal Day 21,
microcephaly; the mice died at an early age. As the mouse knockout phenotype mimics the human PEHO phenotype this suggests that loss of
CCDC88A is a cause of the PEHO phenotype, and that CCDC88A is essential for multiple aspects of normal human neurodevelopment. Progressive
encephalopathy with oedema, hypsarrhythmia and optic atrophy (PEHO) syndrome is rare, of unknown origin, and causes profound intellectual
disability with little if any developmental progress. It was first described in Finnish children in 1991, from where the most complete
phenotypic data originates (Salonen et al., 1991). Onset occurs usually within the first few weeks of life with affected children displaying
seizures, hypotonia and lack of visual fixation (Somer, 1993; D'Arrigo et al., 2005). Those affected thence exhibit early arrest of motor
and mental development, optic atrophy, with radiological examination demonstrating severe cerebellar and brainstem atrophy from birth, with
cerebral atrophy developing at a later stage (D'Arrigo et al., 2005). Usually microcephaly is present at birth, but inevitably there is a
progressive reduction in brain growth (secondary microcephaly). Prognosis is poor with most patients dying before 10 years of age.
Inheritance is predicted to be autosomal recessive (Somer, 1993). Clinically there is phenotypic overlap of PEHO syndrome with the early-
infantile epileptic encephalopathies (Cross and Guerrini, 2013). Cases lacking either optic atrophy or cerebellar hypoplasia are often
termed PEHO-like (Chitty et al., 1996). The genetic cause(s) and the underlying pathophysiology of PEHO syndrome are unknown; and there is
no known curative therapy. We report a large consanguineous family with three affected members in two nuclear families. In affected
individuals we identified a homozygous frameshift mutation in CCDC88A, the gene that encodes the actin binding protein girdin (GIRDers of
actIN filament, also known as APE GIV and HkPP) (Anai et al., 2005; Enomoto et al., 2005; Le-Niculescu et al., 2005; Simpson et al., 2005).
We show that the mutation results in the absence of full length, functional CCDC88A protein. To further investigate the function of CCDC88A
in mammalian brain function we examined CCDC88A-deficient mice and compare their phenotype and CNS architecture to our patients. Our results
reveal novel insights into the underlying developmental, neuroanatomical and molecular defects of CCDC88A deficiency in mammals. Materials
and methods are described in detail in the Supplementary material. The UK National Research Ethics Service, Cambridge Central Research
Ethics committee gave permission for our study. The authors cared for the family for over a decade; all medical care was within the National
Health Service. Results and notes were examined and recorded. Genomic DNA from affected Patients 1 and 2 (Fig. 2A) was extracted and
analysed by exome sequencing (SureSelect Human All Exon 50Mb Kit, Agilent Technologies). Potentially pathogenic mutations were identified by
comparison with the GRCh37 reference human genome, filtering for changes with allele frequencies of < 1 in 500 in the 1000 Genomes project,
and focused on homozygous changes affecting both siblings. Any changes were confirmed and tested for expected segregation, by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) and Sanger sequencing. Figure 1Clinical features of PEHO syndrome caused by CCDC88A truncating mutation. (A) Brain
scans of affected patients. [A(i and ii)] T1- and T2-weighted axial images; T1 SENSE coronal images. All demonstrate reduced brain volume
with bilateral, severe pachygyria/lissencephaly. represents a T2-weighted TIRM sagittal image demonstrating a thin corpus callosum and mild
reduction in cerebellar vermis volume. [B(i and ii)] Characteristic faces with apparent swollen cheeks, narrow sloping forehead and
microcephaly. Typical oedema of the dorsum of the hand. Typical pedal oedema of PEHO syndrome. Images are of the proband Patient 1 at age 6
years. Figure 2Discovery of a c.2313delT/p.Leu772X mutation in CCDC88A in individuals with PEHO syndrome. (A) Family pedigree with both sets
of parents being first cousins. The filled in symbols indicate the three affected children; ‘1’ was the proband. (B) Schematic diagram of
the CCDC88A gene on chromosome 2, and girdin protein with its known functional domains annotated. The c.2313delT mutation occurs in exon 15
and causes a nonsense mutation producing a truncated protein product lacking the membrane binding and actin binding domains of girdin. (C)
Electrophoretograms of an unaffected control, carrier parent and affected child with the p.Leu772X mutation. (D) Reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction amplifying the mutant cDNA transcript from mRNA extracted from the lymphocytes of affected Patient 1 and his
parents. (E) Western blot probed for haemagglutinin (HA), demonstrating the truncated product of CCDC88A harbouring the c.2313delT mutation.
Clinical features of PEHO syndrome caused by CCDC88A truncating mutation. (A) Brain scans of affected patients. [A(i and ii)] T1- and
T2-weighted axial images; T1 SENSE coronal images. All demonstrate reduced brain volume with bilateral, severe pachygyria/lissencephaly.
represents a T2-weighted TIRM sagittal image demonstrating a thin corpus callosum and mild reduction in cerebellar vermis volume. [B(i and
ii)] Characteristic faces with apparent swollen cheeks, narrow sloping forehead and microcephaly. Typical oedema of the dorsum of the hand.
Typical pedal oedema of PEHO syndrome. Images are of the proband Patient 1 at age 6 years. Discovery of a c.2313delT/p.Leu772X mutation in
CCDC88A in individuals with PEHO syndrome. (A) Family pedigree with both sets of parents being first cousins. The filled in symbols indicate
the three affected children; ‘1’ was the proband. (B) Schematic diagram of the CCDC88A gene on chromosome 2, and girdin protein with its
known functional domains annotated. The c.2313delT mutation occurs in exon 15 and causes a nonsense mutation producing a truncated protein
product lacking the membrane binding and actin binding domains of girdin. (C) Electrophoretograms of an unaffected control, carrier parent
and affected child with the p.Leu772X mutation. (D) Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction amplifying the mutant cDNA transcript
from mRNA extracted from the lymphocytes of affected Patient 1 and his parents. (E) Western blot probed for haemagglutinin (HA),
demonstrating the truncated product of CCDC88A harbouring the c.2313delT mutation. To analyse possible nonsense mediated decay of mutant
CCDC88A, blood samples were taken from Patient 1 and their parents, mRNA extracted and reverse transcribed to cDNA. Full details of reverse
transcription PCRs (RT-PCRs) undertaken and primers used are detailed in the Supplementary material. CCDC88A cloned into the pCAGGS vector
has been described previously (Enomoto et al., 2005). The c.2313delT mutation was introduced into the wild-type CCDC88A sequence by site-
directed mutagenesis using the QuikChange II Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit (Agilent), and a haemagglutinin (HA) tag added to the N-terminus.
Expression of wild-type and mutant proteins were analysed by western blot. The CCDC88A knockout mice and conditional Nestin–cre knockout
mice strains have been reported previously (Kitamura et al., 2008; Asai et al., 2012). Full details of brain dissection, staining and
analysis are described in the Supplementary material. The clinical features of the affected children are summarized in Table 1, and
individual histories are given in the Supplementary material. Table 1Diagnostic criteria for PEHO syndrome, with our clinical data and that
of the Ccdc88a knockout miceClinical criteria for PEHOPatient 1Patient 2Patient 3Ccdc88a knockout mouseNecessary criteriaInfantile, usually
neonatal hypotoniaYesYesYesMice underweight (Asai et al., 2012) Postnatal lethality (Asai et al., 2012)Profound psychomotor retardation with
severe hypotonia: absence of motor milestones and speechYesYesYesNot tested; however, we note possible behavioural differences: Ccdc88a mice
do not hang upside down from the cage like normal mice.‘Mice were inactive, and exhibited growth retardation and fatality after P12’ (Asai
et al., 2012)Convulsive disorders presenting with myoclonic jerking and infantile spasmsYesYesYesMesial-temporal lobe epilepsy phenotype
(Asai et al., 2012)Absence or early loss of visual fixation with atrophy of optic disc by 2 years of ageYesYesYesNoProgressive brain atrophy
in neuroimaging studies. Particularly affecting the cerebellum and brain stem; milder supratentorial atrophyYesYesYesDevelopmental defect in
caudal end of corpus callosum Small cerebrum at postnatal Day 0Supportive criteriaSubtle dysmorphic features including narrow forehead,
epicanthic folds, short nose, open mouth, receding chin and tapering fingersYesYesYesN/AOedema of the face and limbs (early
childhood)YesYesYesNot identifiedBrisk tendon reflexes (early childhood)YesYesYesN/AAbsent cortical responses of somatorysensory evoked
potentialsYesNot doneYesN/ASlow nerve conduction velocities in late childhoodNot doneNot doneNot doneN/ADysmyelination in
MRINoaNoaYesN/AAdapted from Somer (1993) and D'Arrigo et al. (2005).aBoth children were scanned within the first year of life, when
myelination is incomplete and it cannot be assessed if these children were going to have a reduction in cerebral white matter. Diagnostic
criteria for PEHO syndrome, with our clinical data and that of the Ccdc88a knockout mice Adapted from Somer (1993) and D'Arrigo et al.
(2005). aBoth children were scanned within the first year of life, when myelination is incomplete and it cannot be assessed if these
children were going to have a reduction in cerebral white matter. All affected children presented at birth with microcephaly [Occipito-
frontal head circumference (OFHC) of − 3 standard deviation (SD) to − 4 SD, typically <29 cm] and moderately severe hypotonia. Weight and
length at birth were normal. Excepting the microcephaly, they were not dysmorphic, nor did they have any extracranial congenital anomalies.
All spent 2–4 weeks in hospital until satisfactory breathing and feeding were established. All developed seizures associated with anoxia
presenting at birth or by 1 month. In all three subjects this progressed to flexion infantile spasms with hypsarrhythmia on EEG within the
first year of life. Seizures became tonic/clonic by the third year, fits occurred frequently (at least weekly throughout life), status
epilepticus necessitating hospital admission at least once in all three, and their seizures were persistently difficult to control
necessitating frequent changes of medication and dosage. Over the first 6 months poor visual attention, fixing and following were noted, and
all were diagnosed as having severe cortical visual inattention. All had moderate optic atrophy but otherwise a normal retina on fundoscopy;
one had minor bilateral megalocornea (10 mm at 6 months, but there were no associated problems from this, such as glaucoma). Puffiness of
the maxillary region of the face, and the dorsum of the hands and feet was present from birth, and persisted, but did not spread in extent
(Fig. 1). Over the first 3 years of life it became clear that all had profound cognitive delay. Severe motor delay was also present with no
development, with a combination of central hypotonia and peripheral hypertonia. Thoraco-lumbar kyphoscoliosis (with no vertebral anomalies)
and hip flexion deformity developed by 3 years in two (the third not being old enough). The degree of microcephaly gradually increased over
the years of follow up to − 5 SD to − 6 SD by 3 years. MRI was performed on all three affected children and showed the consistent and
symmetrical findings shown in Fig. 1: widespread coarse pachygyria with the posterior regions of the brain more affected than anterior,
polymicrogyria prominent in the sylvian fissures, dilated ventricles (reflecting brain substance loss and not raised intraventricular
pressure), hypoplastic corpus callosum, subependymal cysts, and hypoplastic pons. One of the three affected children had a small cerebellum
shown on an MRI scan at 3 months. The two families were related, and each set of parents were first cousins (Fig. 2). The parents were
healthy, and of normal cognitive and physical abilities, and had no abnormal neurological features. The family were ethnic white Caucasians.
Each of the two families also had normal children. In one family a deceased daughter had complete sex reversal and absent adrenal glands,
but no PEHO features. No unusual events occurred in the pregnancy or delivery of the affected children, nor was there any exposure to
potential teratogens during the pregnancies. We concluded that the condition was inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. The affected
children in this family fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for PEHO syndrome; however, the presence of structural brain anomalies
(polymicrogyria nor pachygyria) were not described in the original Finnish cases, and so we considered that the better phenotypic diagnosis
for the family was PEHO-like syndrome. To identify the causative gene mutation in this family, exome analysis was performed on genomic DNA
from two affected children (Patients 1 and 2, Fig. 2A), the raw sequences mapped to the GRCh37 reference human genome, and any possible
mutations shared in both children analysed for their potential to cause PEHO syndrome. We prioritized the search for mutations that would
potentially alter the encoded protein (nonsense/frameshift/splice site/missense mutations), and to those that were both homozygous and
within concordant homozygous segments shared between the two cousins. Only one deleterious mutation was identified, which was present in
both. This was a homozygous frameshift mutation in the CCDC88A gene (c.2313delT) creating a TAG stop codon at the site of the frameshift
(p.Leu772X) (Fig. 2B). Segregation of the mutation was confirmed by Sanger sequencing as homozygous in all three affected children and
heterozygous in all of their parents (Fig. 2C). The mutation was not identified in the 1000 Genomes Project or ExAC database, and we did not
find it in > 200 ethnically matched control chromosomes tested by Sanger sequencing. CCDC88A encodes the actin binding protein girdin, which
has previously been demonstrated as a binding partner of Akt and to play essential roles in the migration of fibroblasts, endothelial cells,
cancer cells and neuronal cells (Enomoto et al., 2005, 2009; Jiang et al., 2008; Kitamura et al., 2008). Mice with germline deletion of
girdin exhibit neuronal migration defects which result in hypoplasia of the olfactory bulb, granule cell dispersion in the dentate gyrus and
postnatal lethality, demonstrating a crucial role for girdin in the early development of the mouse brain (Asai et al., 2012). The girdin
protein consists of a conserved N terminal domain showing significant homology to the microtubule binding region of the Hook protein family
and proposed dimerization domain (Enomoto et al., 2006), a coiled coil central domain, known to bind members of the Gα family of
heterotrimeric G proteins (Le-Niculescu et al., 2005) and a C-terminal domain that specifies binding partners including actin and Akt (Fig.
2B) (Enomoto et al., 2006). We hypothesized that the introduction of a premature stop codon early within the coiled coil domain would likely
result in nonsense mediated decay and hence complete loss of the translated product. However, we were unexpectedly able to identify a
reduced amount of full length mRNA, carrying the p.Leu772X in the lymphocytes of Patient 1 (Fig. 2D and Supplementary Fig. 1), and were able
to exclude the possibility of abnormal splicing of the exon containing the c.2313delT mutation (Supplementary Fig. 1). While it is highly
likely that this mutation would nonetheless produce a complete knockout of the girdin protein, mRNA extracted from the brains of a Ccdc88a
knockout mouse produced by excising exon 3 to produce a premature stop codon also displayed presence of the mutated Ccdc88a transcript (Asai
et al., 2012), we proceeded to confirm the pathogenicity of the truncated girdin by cloning it into HEK293 cells as a haemagglutinin-tagged
fusion protein. Wild-type girdin produced a single band at ∼250 kDa by western blot, whereas introduction of the c.2313delT mutation by
site-directed mutagenesis resulted in a truncated product of around 105 kDa in size (Fig. 2E). Many of girdin’s reported functions are
reliant on its interaction with C-terminal binding partners (including actin, Par-3, Akt, multiple receptor tyrosine kinases and Gαi3;
Enomoto et al., 2005, 2006; Ohara et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2014; Bhandari et al., 2015) and its guanine nucleotide exchange factor domain,
membrane binding region and a number of functional phosphorylatable residues lie downstream of the premature stop codon introduced (Bhandari
et al., 2015). It seems probable that, in the unlikely event that the truncated protein is produced in vivo, the function of the mutant
protein would be highly disrupted due to its absent C terminal functions. Having proven the potential pathogenicity of the p.Leu772X
mutation in cellular models we asked if the knockout of CCDC88A in the mouse might mimic features of PEHO syndrome and could be used to
identify molecular defects in the mouse brain responsible for the PEHO phenotype, which are unable to be investigated in affected humans.
Mice with a knockout of CCDC88A have previously been reported to show a mesial-temporal lobe epilepsy phenotype, and this was again found
(Asai et al., 2012). The mice also show postnatal lethality and postnatal growth retardation being reported underweight at death (Asai et
al., 2012). This phenotype is generally consistent with that of PEHO syndrome. We proceeded to assess the brains of Ccdc88a deficient mice
at an anatomical level. Completeness of corpus callosum development in Ccdc88a deficient mice was assessed with Nissl stained coronal
sections of neonatal (postnatal Day 0) brain tissue. There was no global difference in appearance of corpus callosum between wild-type and
Ccdc88a deficient mouse, while there was a significant developmental defect in the caudal end of corpus callosum in knockout mice (Fig.
3A–C). This may match the finding of a hypoplastic corpus callosum observed in CCDC88A mutant human patients. Layer structures of cerebrum
at postnatal Day 12 were compared between wild-type and knockout using Kluver-Barrera staining and immunohistochemistry with layer specific
markers (Cux1 for layer II–III, and Ctip2 for layer V). With Kluver-Barrera staining, no ‘polymicrocyria’ like lesions were observed.
Immunohistochemistry with layer markers didn’t detect any abnormal layer structure, except that staining intensity of Ctip2 was slightly
less in knockout mice. To assess optic nerve atrophy, the cross-section area of optic nerves were measured with ImageJ (National Institute
of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD), and averaged. There was no significant difference between wild-type and knockout mice (wild-type versus
knockout, n = 6 versus 5, mean 0.0241017 versus 0.025981 mm2, SD 0.003509 versus 0.003313 mm2, t-test P-value 0.384). To assess
microcephaly, analysis of overhead view pictures of brains from nestin-Cre driven Ccdc88aflox/flox mice (cKO) at postnatal Day21 were
carried out using ImageJ. Projected area of cerebrum of cKO was significantly smaller than that of Ccdc88a wild-type/flox nestin-Cre (-)
(control), while areas of cerebellum of cKO and control were similar (Fig. 3D and E). Figure 3Ccdc88a-deficient neonatal mice (postnatal Day
0) exhibit mild hypoplastic defect in the caudal end of corpus callosum at midline. (A) Paraffin embedded brain tissues from wild-type mice
(WT) or straight Ccdc88a deficient mice (KO) were coronally sectioned at 7-mm thickness. All sections were serially numbered using the
rostral end of hippocampus as a reference section. Rostral sections are positively numbered, and caudal sections were negatively numbered.
(B) Nissl stained coronal sections of wild-type and knockout brain. Positions of corpus callosum (CC) relative to the rostral end of
hippocampus were similar between wild-type and knockout mice (at around +120 section), while the caudal end of knockout mice corpus callosum
was relatively displaced forward compared with the caudal end of wild-type corpus callosum (wild-type at around −20 section level, knockout
at around the reference section). hipp = rostral end of hippocampus. Black square indicates the area of each inset at bottom right corner.
(C) Statistical analysis of positions of corpus callosum relative to the rostral end of hippocampus. Three replicates from each genotype
were analysed. Section numbers of the rostral end of corpus callosum from the reference section were averaged. In accordance with the
observations in B, the caudal ends of corpus callosum of knockout were significantly displaced to rostral side. Values are shown as mean
plus standard error. T-test P values less than 0.05 were considered significant. (D) Overhead view of Ccdc88a wild-type/flox:nestin-Cre(−)
control mouse (Con) and Ccdc88a flox/flox:nes-Cre(+) conditional knockout mouse (cKO). (E) Horizontal projected area was measured and
analysed. Cerebrum of cKO was significantly smaller than control mice, while areas of cerebellum were not different between controls and cKO
mice. Ccdc88a-deficient neonatal mice (postnatal Day 0) exhibit mild hypoplastic defect in the caudal end of corpus callosum at midline. (A)
Paraffin embedded brain tissues from wild-type mice (WT) or straight Ccdc88a deficient mice (KO) were coronally sectioned at 7-mm thickness.
All sections were serially numbered using the rostral end of hippocampus as a reference section. Rostral sections are positively numbered,
and caudal sections were negatively numbered. (B) Nissl stained coronal sections of wild-type and knockout brain. Positions of corpus
callosum (CC) relative to the rostral end of hippocampus were similar between wild-type and knockout mice (at around +120 section), while
the caudal end of knockout mice corpus callosum was relatively displaced forward compared with the caudal end of wild-type corpus callosum
(wild-type at around −20 section level, knockout at around the reference section). hipp = rostral end of hippocampus. Black square indicates
the area of each inset at bottom right corner. (C) Statistical analysis of positions of corpus callosum relative to the rostral end of
hippocampus. Three replicates from each genotype were analysed. Section numbers of the rostral end of corpus callosum from the reference
section were averaged. In accordance with the observations in B, the caudal ends of corpus callosum of knockout were significantly displaced
to rostral side. Values are shown as mean plus standard error. T-test P values less than 0.05 were considered significant. (D) Overhead view
of Ccdc88a wild-type/flox:nestin-Cre(−) control mouse (Con) and Ccdc88a flox/flox:nes-Cre(+) conditional knockout mouse (cKO). (E)
Horizontal projected area was measured and analysed. Cerebrum of cKO was significantly smaller than control mice, while areas of cerebellum
were not different between controls and cKO mice. We investigated a multi-affected consanguineous family of British origin with three
children born with features of PEHO syndrome. By comparing the exomes of consanguineous first cousins we detected a single nucleotide
deletion in exon 15 of CCDC88A (c.2313delT). This results in a frameshift and incorporation of a stop codon (p.Leu772X). Our results confirm
an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance for PEHO syndrome, and identify CCDC88A as a further gene essential for normal human brain
development. CCDC88A encodes the actin binding protein girdin, a multi-domain, non-receptor guanine exchange factor (GEF) for G proteins
Gαi1, Gα2 and Gα3, which has been attributed a wide range of functions including roles in cell migration and Akt/EGFR signalling (Enomoto et
al., 2006; Beas et al., 2012; Bhandari et al., 2015), actin organization and cell motility (Enomoto et al., 2005), neurite outgrowth and
migration, axon/dendrite development (Enomoto et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2011) and to regulate early endosome maturation (Beas et al.,
2012). Girdin can link actin filaments through its C terminal domain and simultaneously bind the plasma membrane through the adjacent
membrane binding domain at the protein C terminus. This allows girdin to function in actin cytoskeletal remodelling during cell mobility (Hu
et al., 2015). Other genes reported to cause cortical lamination defects (lissencephaly, pachygyria and polymicrogryia), severe
developmental delay and seizures, are also generally cytoskeletal proteins (e.g. the tubulins) or act upon cytoskeletal proteins [LIS1
(PAFAH1B1), DCX, reelin (RELN), NUDE (NDE1) and NDEL1], and similar to CCDC88A, have complex multiple interactions, and functions (Guerrini
and Dobyns, 2014). Postnatally, girdin is expressed in the majority of mammalian tissues; however, during embryonic development, the
expression pattern of CCDC88A is specifically restricted, both spatially and temporally to regions of the fore-, mid- and hindbrain as well
as the dorsal root ganglia, somites, limbs, nasal processes and branchial arches (Simpson et al., 2005). This specific expression profile
implies a potentially important role during embryonic development. The identification of a truncating mutation in CCDC88A in individuals
with PEHO syndrome confirms a crucial function for girdin during embryonic development. Patients with a mutation in CCDC88A resulting in
either a truncated girdin or absence of the protein due to nonsense mediated decay, displayed all of the necessary clinical criteria to be
diagnosed with PEHO syndrome. All presented at birth with microcephaly and moderately severe hypotonia and developed seizures that
progressed into infantile spasms with hypsarrhythmia on EEG. All also displayed progressive brain atrophy, optic atrophy, severe cognitive
delay and puffiness of the maxillary region of the face, and the dorsum of the hands and feet. Reassessment of knockout mice for Ccdc88a
demonstrated further confirmation of CCDC88A as a PEHO-causing gene, with mice displaying a similar phenotype with mesial-temporal lobe
epilepsy and early demise, and structural brain developmental defects affecting the corpus callosum and cerebrum. A lack of macroscopic
pachygyria was expected as the murine cerebral cortex is ‘smooth’ and without a gyral pattern. However, the finding of only a minor (layer
5) cortical lamination defects in Ccdc88a mice may have been unexpected; the human/mouse correlations for other similar brain–cytoskeletal
genes are variable and unexplained: e.g. DCX mutations cause pachygyria in humans and the knockout mouse shows only hippocampal lamination
defects (des Portes et al., 1998; Corbo et al., 2002); NDE1 mutations cause lissencephaly in humans and the knockout mouse has microcephaly,
but cortical lamination is mostly preserved (Feng and Walsh, 2004; Wynshaw-Boris et al., 2010). Recently, an individual with PEHO syndrome
was reported who harboured a de novo missense mutations in KIF1A, and the authors noted up to six similar previously reported cases
(Langlois et al., 2015). Of other individuals with significant mental handicap and KIF1A missense mutations, most had prominent and
progressive spasticity and neuropathy—findings atypical of PEHO syndrome (Okamoto et al., 2014; Esmaeeli Nieh et al., 2015; Lee et al.,
2015; Ohba et al., 2015). Furthermore, KIF1A mutations have also been reported to cause dominant and recessive pure spastic paraplegia,
recessive sensory neuropathy and dominant mental retardation (OMIM: 601255). Thus, the PEHO syndrome phenotype can also have a dominant, and
not just a recessive, inheritance pattern caused by a subset of KIF1A missense mutations. To conclude, we report the first identification of
a gene, CCDC88A, which when mutated causes an autosomal recessive PEHO-like neurodevelopmental phenotype. We detail the human phenotype
caused by the lack of functioning GIRDIN, and found similar neurological features and anatomy in CCDC88A knockout mouse. This work was
supported by the MRC and Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (M.S.N.). Y.C.C. and C.G.W. are supported by the Cambridge NIHR
Biomedical Research Centre. This work was also supported by A-STEP from the Japan Science and Technology Agency in 2014 (AS251Z02522Q) and
in 2015 (AS262Z00715Q), a Takeda Visionary Research Grant 2014 from the Takeda Science Foundation, a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research
(C) (to M.A.), and a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (S) (to M.T.) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and
Technology in Japan. Supplementary material is available at Brain online. progressive encephalopathy with oedema, hypsarrhythmia and optic
atrophy
