Non-Shiga toxin-associated hemolytic uremic syndrome is known to be caused by dysregulation of the alternative complement pathway.
Infections, drugs, pregnancy, bone marrow transplantation, malignancy, and autoimmune disorders have all been reported to trigger episodes
of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. To the best of our knowledge, there have been no previous reports of an association between diabetic
ketoacidosis and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. We describe a case of a 26-year-old Spanish man who presented with diabetic
ketoacidosis and was found to have the triad of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and acute kidney injury. The patient
had a normal ADAMTS13 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13) activity level, and his renal
biopsy demonstrated predominant changes of diabetic glomerulosclerosis with an area compatible with thrombotic microangiopathy suggestive of
superimposed atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. Complement sequencing subsequently revealed a potential causative mutation in exon 12 of
complement factor B with changes of lysine at amino acid position 533 to an arginine (CFB p.K533R). To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first case report of diabetic ketoacidosis presenting with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome associated with a variant of complement
factor B in an adult patient. Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) is characterized by the triad of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia,
thrombocytopenia, and acute kidney injury. The majority of the cases are seen in childhood and are caused by Shiga-like toxin (so-called
typical HUS). Non-Shiga toxin-associated HUS (atypical HUS, or aHUS) is known to be caused by dysregulation of the alternative complement
pathway due to genetic mutations or neutralizing autoantibodies . Infections, drugs, pregnancy, bone marrow transplantation, malignancy, and
autoimmune disorders have all been reported to trigger episodes of aHUS . To the best of our knowledge, there have been no reports of an
association between diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and aHUS. We report a case of an adult patient with DKA presenting with aHUS associated with
a variant of complement factor B (CFB). A 26-year-old Hispanic man with a history of type 1 diabetes that had been diagnosed between 12 and
14 years of age was brought to the emergency department (ED) after two episodes of new-onset seizures at home. A family member reported that
the patient had stopped taking insulin for 1 day before presentation. He complained of epigastric pain and nonbloody, nonbilious vomiting at
home. In the ED, the patient had another two episodes of tonic-clonic seizures. His physical examination revealed that he was agitated,
febrile (body temperature 38.5 °C), hypertensive (blood pressure 149/87 mmHg), and tachycardiac (heart rate 105 beats/minute). The remainder
of his physical examination was unremarkable. His laboratory data (Table 1) were remarkable for hyperglycemia and high anion gap metabolic
acidosis with an elevated β-hydroxybutyrate level compatible with DKA. No central nervous system pathology was revealed by a computed
tomographic scan of his brain without intravenous contrast or by a lumbar puncture. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for
management of DKA. His ketoacidosis resolved within 24 hours on intravenous fluids and an insulin drip. However, he continued to remain very
drowsy in spite of correction of the DKA. Repeat laboratory data showed anemia (hemoglobin 9.1 g/dl, baseline value 11.8 g/dl 2 months
prior), thrombocytopenia (150 × 109/L, baseline value 416 × 109/L 2 months prior), acute kidney injury with a blood urea nitrogen/creatinine
ratio of 33/3.4 mg/dl (baseline value 40/1.4 mg/dl 2 months prior), and evidence of hemolysis (lactate dehydrogenase 1700 IU/L, indirect
bilirubin 1.7 mg/dl) with schistocytes present on his peripheral blood smear. His presentation strongly suggested the possibility of
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/HUS, and emergent, empiric plasmapheresis was initiated while awaiting the result for the ADAMTS13 (a
disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13) activity level. His additional serologic workup results,
including complement components C3 and C4, antinuclear antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, cryoglobulins, anti-glomerular
basement membrane antibody, and hepatitis B and C panels, were normal or negative.Table 1Hematological and chemistry laboratory
valuesParameter (reference range)Admission (day 0)Postplasmapheresis (day 5)Initiation of eculizumab (6 weeks after)WBC, 109/L127.25.3Hb,
g/dl9.18.28.0Platelets, 109/L150219202Serum Na+, mEq/L142135130Serum K+, mEq/L4.45.55.6Serum bicarbonate, mEq/L72627BUN,
mg/dl333466Creatinine, mg/dl3.43.65.6Glucose, mg/dl520––Indirect bilirubin, mg/dl (0.2–0.8)1.70.7–LDH, IU/L1700763–Haptoglobin, mg/dl
(43–212)<15––pH7.33––Anion gap20––β-Hydroxybutyrate, mmol/L (0.02–0.27)1.21––ADAMTS1381 %––SchistocytesPresentNone–Urinalysis pH6.0 Protein,
mg/dl>300 Glucose, mg/dl>1000–– RBC25–30/HPF WBC0–3/HPF Granular case5–10/HPF ADAMTS13 a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a
thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13, BUN blood urea nitrogen, Hb hemoglobin, HPF high-power field, LDH lactate dehydrogenase, RBC red
blood cells, WBC white blood cells Hematological and chemistry laboratory values ADAMTS13 a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a
thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13, BUN blood urea nitrogen, Hb hemoglobin, HPF high-power field, LDH lactate dehydrogenase, RBC red
blood cells, WBC white blood cells The patient responded with a dramatic improvement in mental status and hemolytic parameters after 5 days
of plasmapheresis (Table 1). Unfortunately, his kidney function did not improve. On day 6, his ADAMTS13 activity was reported as normal (81
%, reference range 68–163 % activity). His anti-complement factor H (anti-CFH) antibody result was negative. His renal biopsy showed
moderate to severe nodular diabetic glomerulosclerosis with superimposed thrombotic microangiopathy in a single glomerulus, suggestive of
superimposed aHUS (Fig. 1). Complement sequencing of the coding regions of CFH, complement factor I (CFI), CFB, C3, membrane cofactor
protein (MCP, CD46), diacylglycerol kinase ε, and thrombomodulin was completed. A heterozygous, nonsynonymous variant was identified in exon
12 of CFB with changes of a lysine at amino acid position 533 to an arginine (CFB p.K533R). The patient was started on treatment with
eculizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody targeting complement component C5, after he received meningococcal vaccine. He had no further
episode of DKA or aHUS during 5 months of follow-up after initiation of eculizumab therapy. However, his renal function gradually
deteriorated and hemodialysis was started (Table 1, Fig. 2). He is currently being evaluated for kidney transplant.Fig. 1Kidney biopsy
showed (a) moderate to marked, diffuse, and global increase in mesangial matrix-forming nodules compressing the capillary lumina and (b)
only one glomerulus containing a fibrin thrombus involving the hilar region of the tuftFig. 2Serum creatinine changes during the course of
hospitalization and follow-up. DKA diabetic ketoacidosis, ESRD end-stage renal disease, HD hemodialysis, TMA thrombotic microangiopathy
Kidney biopsy showed (a) moderate to marked, diffuse, and global increase in mesangial matrix-forming nodules compressing the capillary
lumina and (b) only one glomerulus containing a fibrin thrombus involving the hilar region of the tuft Serum creatinine changes during the
course of hospitalization and follow-up. DKA diabetic ketoacidosis, ESRD end-stage renal disease, HD hemodialysis, TMA thrombotic
microangiopathy Extensive research has established an association between aHUS and the alternative complement pathway. It has been reported
that mutations in the genes encoding proteins regulating the alternative complement pathway may result in abnormal activation of this
pathway. It could be due to loss-of-function mutations in CFH, MCP, and CFI by either nonsense or missense mutations or by gain-of-function
mutations in C3 and CFB . Under normal circumstances, the CFB gene encodes the factor B protein, which is a component of C3 convertase,
C3bBb, and catalyzes the proteolytic cleavage of C3 into C3a and C3b. Genetic mutations in the CFB gene may cause either enhanced formation
of C3 convertase or increase its resistance to inactivation, thus leading to uncontrolled hyperactivity of the alternative complement
pathway. CFB mutations have previously been reported to be associated with aHUS at a frequency as high as 1.4 % . Table 2 lists all the
previously reported cases with CFB mutations in patients with aHUS; the majority of these reported patients were children. The first two
mutations in CFB gene F286L in exon 6 and K323E in exon 7 are both gain-of-function mutations that enhance the formation of C3 convertase
[3, 4]. The CFB mutation (p.Lys350Asn) reported by Funato and colleagues causes resistance to decay acceleration factor and therefore
increases C3bBb stability .Table 2Previously reported CFB mutations in patients with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome reported in the
English-language literatureCase reportsSexAgeMutation; amino acid changeFremeaus-Bacchi et al. ––p. V455IGoicoechea de Jorge et al. M23
yearsc.858C>G; p.F286LM4 monthsc.967A>G; p.K323ETawadrous et al. F8 yearsc.1598A>G; p.K533RFunato et al. F/M/F8/6/20 yearsc.1050G>C;
p.K350NNoris et al. ––R183WMarinozzi et al. ––c.1598A>G; K508RBekassy et al. F12 yearsc. 1298T>C; c.L433SGilbert et al. F4 monthsc.967A>C;
p. K323QMaga et al. ––c.497C>T; p.S166P c.608G>A; p.R203Q c.724A>C; p.I242L c.967A>C; p.K323Q c.1365C>T; p.M458I c.1598A>G; p.K533RRoumenina
et al. M53 yearsc.837A>C: p.D254GF33 yearsc.1050G>C: p. K325NF19 monthsc.1050G>C; p.K350NZhu et al.[present report]M26p.K533R Previously
reported CFB mutations in patients with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome reported in the English-language literature Regarding our patient
with adult-onset aHUS, we report the p.K533R mutation in exon 12 of CFB with change of a lysine at amino acid position 533 to an arginine.
This mutation was previously identified in an 8-year-girl with aHUS reported by Tawadrous and colleagues , who believed it to contribute to
the pathogenesis of aHUS. Further evidence in favor of the potentially pathogenic effect is the fairly rare minor allele frequency of 0.2 %
in the Latino population, in which aHUS is a rare event . More recently, Marinozzi and colleagues performed comprehensive assessment of the
p.K508R mutation, a more mature protein of p.K533R after removing the leader peptide, which leads to altered numbering for the same variant.
They concluded that p.K508R most likely represents a rare benign polymorphism. Although they acknowledged that the p.K508R variant did
confer moderately increased serine protease activity in vitro, they judged it as inadequate to explain the reduction of C3 clinically. On
the basis of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics standards , current understanding of the clinical interpretation for this
variant is that it is “a variant of uncertain clinical significance.” However, controversies still exist. Therefore, additional studies are
required for further clarification of the contribution of this rare variant/polymorphism to the pathogenesis of aHUS. In addition, with new
technology, more genetic mutations that contribute to the pathogenesis of aHUS are likely to be identified in the future . Therefore, we
speculate that the combination of multiple incompletely penetrant variants or a “trigger event” may contribute to the development of aHUS in
some cases such as our patient’s. It has been proposed that a “trigger event” or a “second hit” is related to precipitation of an episode of
aHUS in a susceptible individual. These individuals may have gene mutations or antibodies to complement proteins that lead to uncontrolled
continuous activation of the alternative pathway, resulting in the formation of the membrane attack complex. Various trigger events
associated with aHUS have been reported previously, including infections, drugs, malignancy, pregnancy, or autoimmune diseases such as
systemic lupus erythematous, C3 nephritic factor, and anticardiolipin. No obvious infectious etiology was identified in our patient. He was
noncompliant with insulin therapy, which may lead to development of DKA. Subsequently, DKA may have been the “trigger event” for the episode
of aHUS due to genetic predisposition with the CFB p.K533R variant. However, the possibility that aHUS may have precipitated DKA in our
patient cannot be completely ruled out. Studies have shown that hemostatic changes leading to a thrombotic tendency occur during
ketoacidosis [12, 13]. In addition, DKA elicits systemic inflammation associated with dysregulation of adhesion molecule expression and
cytokine release by endothelial cells . We propose that, in our patient, endothelial cell dysfunction during DKA enhanced the abnormality of
endothelial damage and microvascular thrombosis mediated by his abnormal complement activity and further activated the complement pathway,
leading to his aHUS episode. Treatment of aHUS has been evolving rapidly with the recent approval of eculizumab, a humanized monoclonal
antibody that binds with high affinity to the human C5 protein [15, 16]. End-stage renal disease or death was reported to occur in up to 65
% of patients with aHUS before eculizumab was introduced . Eculizumab has been reported to be effective, with improvement of renal function
as well as decreased episodes of aHUS. Our patient’s kidney function gradually worsened despite eculizumab therapy, which was likely
secondary to progression of diabetic nephropathy because only a small area of superimposed thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) was identified
together with moderate to severe nodular diabetic glomerulosclerosis in the kidney biopsy and no further episode of aHUS has occurred since
then. He was started on hemodialysis and currently is awaiting evaluation for kidney transplant. The patient will require standard
maintenance treatment with lifelong eculizumab because only very limited evidence regarding discontinuation of eculizumab has been reported
to date . To the best of our knowledge, we report the first case of DKA presenting with aHUS in an adult patient. We report a potential
causative mutation for aHUS: p.K533R in exon 12 of CFB. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompany images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. a disintegrin
and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13 atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome blood urea nitrogen complement
component C3 complement component C4 complement component C5 complement factor B complement factor H complement factor I diabetic
ketoacidosis emergency department end-stage renal disease hemodialysis hemoglobin high-power field lactate dehydrogenase membrane cofactor
protein red blood cells thrombotic microangiopathy white blood cells Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions ZZ, HC, RG, SS, and VG evaluated and treated the patient. ZZ, HC, RG, SS, and VG reviewed the literature,
designed the case report, and analyzed the data. ZZ, HC, and RG drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
The authors thank Dr. Dominick Santoriello at Columbia University for interpreting the kidney biopsy results.
