Orbital inflammatory pseudotumor is a rare inflammatory condition of unknown cause that may extend intracranially, usually as a dural-based
infiltrate. Here we report the first case of orbital pseudotumor presenting with intra-axial Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) changes. A
57-year-old white female, with a 3-month history of headache and right palpebral edema, presented with marked right temporal lobe edema with
ominous MRI appearance, and ipsilateral alterations of orbital and periorbital structures. Following steroid therapy, both intracranial and
orbital involvement dramatically improved. Orbital inflammatory pseudotumor with chronic inflammation may infrequently present with
intracranial involvement, mimicking more aggressive diseases, even showing intra-axial enhancement after i.v. contrast administration in
brain MRI. Awareness of this possibility may help neurologists to choose the appropriate therapeutic approach. Inflammatory pseudotumor is a
rare benign condition of unknown cause, characterized by unencapsulated mass-like aggregates of myofibroblastic spindle cells and
inflammatory cells, including lymphocytes . It has been described in almost any location, with no age- or sex- preference, although most
commonly in the lung and orbit . Orbital inflammatory pseudotumor ranks third after Graves’ and lymphoproliferative diseases among the most
common orbital pathologies , and accounts for approximately 5–8 % of all orbital masses. It may present as an acute, subacute, or chronic
unilateral myositis or dacryoadenitis, but a wide range of orbital content involvement [4, 5] and clinical presentations are possible,
including proptosis, diplopia, conjunctival chemosis, visual disability, restriction of extraocular muscle movement, unilateral periorbital
pain, and cranial nerve palsies, typically with dramatic response to corticosteroid therapy . Orbital pseudotumor is commonly restricted to
the orbit; however, an extension beyond the orbit can occur, usually in the middle cranial fossa and cavernous sinus, in cases of extensive
and chronic inflammation , through one of the three major posterior orbital openings: the superior orbital fissure (SOF), the optic canal,
and the inferior orbital fissure. Extraorbital extension of orbital pseudotumor in the adjacent paranasal sinuses , and into the
infratemporal and pterygopalatine fossae has also been rarely reported. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is the best technique for imaging
orbital pseudotumor, although MRI findings may be nonspecific, and for evaluating its extraorbital extension. The pseudotumor infiltrate in
the orbit typically demonstrates low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and frequently on T2-weighted images, depending on the degree of
fibrosis, with the sclerosing variety being the most T2-hypointense. Marked gadolinium enhancement is usually present . Orbital pseudotumor
may thus mimick several disease entities, including infection, lymphoma, sarcoidosis, and other granulomatous diseases [12, 13]; therefore,
it is often a diagnosis of exclusion, based on history, clinical course, response to steroid therapy, laboratory tests, or even biopsy in
selected cases. The intracranial extension of orbital pseudotumor, although rare (8.8 % in a Computed Tomography series), has been
previously reported , and usually involves the middle cranial fossa (MCF) and the cavernous sinus (CS) through the SOF, appearing as an
enhancing nodular or plaque-like thickening of the dura mater, as summarized in our literature review (Table 1). In particular, the 3
patterns identified by Clifton et al. still represent the paradigm of the intracranial involvement, eliciting variable edema in the brain
tissue contiguous to the extra-axial infiltrate. Here we report the first case, to the best of our knowledge, of orbital pseudotumor
presenting with brain MRI findings indicative of intra-axial changes.Table 1Previously reported cases of orbital pseudotumor with
intracranial extensionYearAuthorPatient age (years)GenderIntracranial location/features1984Kaye et al.71MACF (planum sphenoidale), dural-
based1986Frohman et al.48MSOF, optic canal, bone erosion48FMCF/CS, bone erosion72MSOF, bone erosion1986Noble et al.46FACF, dural
thickening1992Clifton et al.49MMCF/CS, pattern II69MSOF, pattern I54FMCF/CS, pattern II36MMCF, pattern I86MMCF/CS, dural thickening,
bilateral involvement, pattern III71FMCF/CS, pattern II30MMCF/CS, dural thickening, pattern III61MMCF/CS, pattern II1993Bencherif et
al.23MCS, SOF, left fronto-temporal dural thickening, sphenoid bone sclerosis1993Olmos et al.64FCS/Meckel cave, parasellar plaque, dural
surface down to clivus and C2 body1996de Jesus et al.16FOptic canal, SOF, MCF; dural thickening of the left hemisphere and
tentorium1998Soares et al.--Pituitary fossa/CS, ICA compression2000Ayala et al.83FACF extra-axial mass without bone involvement, (possibly
through the anterior etmoid foramen)2004Mahr et al.40MMCF, dural thickening over the temporal pole41MOptic canal, MCF paraclinoid
mass73FMeckel cave/CS2005Lee et al.58MMCF/CS, dural thickening; ICA encasement63MSOF55MMCF/CS, petrous apex, dural thickening; brain edema;
ICA encasement32MMCF/CS dural thickening; brain edema46MMCF/CS, petrous apex, Meckel cave, dural thickening; brain edema; ICA
encasement2006Zborowska et al.45FMCF/CS, Meckel cave, dural thickening over the temporal pole32MMCF/CS, pituitary fossa, tentorium; bone
erosion (sphenoid wing and orbital roof)48FMCF/CS; parasellar mass, bone erosion, ICA encasement2011Saifudheen et al.50MMCF/CS large dural
mass (temporal pole); brain edema ACF Anterior cranial fossa, MCF Middle cranial fossa, CS Cavernous sinus, SOF Superior orbital fissure,
ICA Internal carotid artery, Pattern I, II, III: patterns of intracranial extension of orbital pseudotumor as described by Clifton et al.
Previously reported cases of orbital pseudotumor with intracranial extension ACF Anterior cranial fossa, MCF Middle cranial fossa, CS
Cavernous sinus, SOF Superior orbital fissure, ICA Internal carotid artery, Pattern I, II, III: patterns of intracranial extension of
orbital pseudotumor as described by Clifton et al. A 57-year-old obese smoker woman presented with a three-month history of debilitating,
daily right-sided headache, worsening with eye movement, right palpebral edema and blurred vision. Her medical history included anxiety,
depression and hypertension. Laboratory data showed increased C-reactive protein (5,75 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (56 mm/h) and
hematic fibrinogen (529 mg/dL). Clinical examination and fundoscopy revealed right conjunctival chemosis, temporal muscle edema, palpebral
edema and ptosis, and ill-defined optic disk with papilledema. The visual field and neurological examination were normal. The patient
underwent contrast-enhanced (CE) MRI scan of the brain and orbits, at 1.5 Tesla, with FLAIR (TR: 8005 ms, TE: 100 ms, TI: 2200 ms, matrix:
256x192, slice thickness: 5 mm), STIR (TR: 2650 ms, TE: 90 ms, TI: 180 ms, matrix: 256x204, slice thickness: 3 mm) and Fast Spin-Echo T1-
and T2-weighted (TR: 583–4454 ms, TE: 15–100 ms, matrix: 244x194-384x288, slice thickness: 5 mm, respectively) sequences, acquired before
and after intravenous administration of Gadobutrol (Bayer HealthCare, 0.1 mmol/Kg). Also, MR angiography of the intracranial arterial and
venous systems was performed using 3D and 2D time-of-flight (TOF) sequences, respectively. The MRI scan showed enlargement of the lateral
rectus muscle in the right orbit, involving the anterior tendon insertion, infiltration and obliteration of the contiguous fat due to a
homogenous T2-hypointense tissue, with marked contrast-enhancement; similar changes were demonstrated in the temporal and the pterygoid
muscles within the right masticator space (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Orbital and extraorbital involvement before and after steroid therapy. Upper row:
coronal STIR (a, b) and axial FLAIR (c) MR images before treatment. Lower row: coronal STIR (d, e) and axial FLAIR (F) MR follow-up images
after steroid therapy. Evidence of marked enlargement and edema involving the lateral rectus muscle in the right orbit, with infiltration of
the contiguous fat (a), and the temporal and pterygoid muscles in the ipsilateral masticator space (b), all showing complete regression at
follow-up (d, e). The massive vasogenic edema of the anterior portion of the temporal lobe evident in the initial MR scan (c), also shows
dramatic reduction at follow-up (f) Orbital and extraorbital involvement before and after steroid therapy. Upper row: coronal STIR (a, b)
and axial FLAIR (c) MR images before treatment. Lower row: coronal STIR (d, e) and axial FLAIR (F) MR follow-up images after steroid
therapy. Evidence of marked enlargement and edema involving the lateral rectus muscle in the right orbit, with infiltration of the
contiguous fat (a), and the temporal and pterygoid muscles in the ipsilateral masticator space (b), all showing complete regression at
follow-up (d, e). The massive vasogenic edema of the anterior portion of the temporal lobe evident in the initial MR scan (c), also shows
dramatic reduction at follow-up (f) A number of intracranial findings were also detected: massive vasogenic edema of the anterior portion of
the right temporal lobe, associated with thickening and enhancement of the contiguous dura (adjacent to the sphenoid wing) and with striking
sub-cortical enhancement, that increased at 1 h (Fig. 2). The cavernous sinuses were normal; at MR venography, absence of flow signal in the
right spheno-parietal sinus was observed, due to venous compression, with no signs of thrombosis. Also, unenhanced brain Computed Tomography
confirmed the intracranial/extracranial edematous changes and disclosed sclerotic reaction of the right sphenoid wing with focal cortical
erosion (not shown).Fig. 2Early and delayed intracranial enhancement in the acute phase. Axial CE T1w MR images before treatment at the
level of the middle cranial fossa obtained 5 min (a) and 1 h (b) after iv administration of Gadolinium. Substantial thickening and intense
enhancement of the dura mater adjacent to the right sphenoid wing can be appreciated (a), as well as involvement of the sub-cortical white
matter of the temporal pole, that increases in the delayed phase (b). The temporal muscle also appears markedly enlarged and intensely
enhancing compared to the contralateral one Early and delayed intracranial enhancement in the acute phase. Axial CE T1w MR images before
treatment at the level of the middle cranial fossa obtained 5 min (a) and 1 h (b) after iv administration of Gadolinium. Substantial
thickening and intense enhancement of the dura mater adjacent to the right sphenoid wing can be appreciated (a), as well as involvement of
the sub-cortical white matter of the temporal pole, that increases in the delayed phase (b). The temporal muscle also appears markedly
enlarged and intensely enhancing compared to the contralateral one Signs of systemic diseases such as autoimmune disorders were searched
using chest x-ray and laboratory tests, including anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, C3, C4, and angiotensin-
converting enzyme blood levels, all showing no abnormalities. A lumbar puncture was refused by the patient. Orbital pseudotumor with
intracranial involvement was therefore suspected, and the patient was started on steroid therapy (i.v. dexamethasone, 8 mg daily for 4 days,
followed by 4 mg for other 4 days, and then tapered with the oral solution). Biopsy was proposed to the patient as a necessary integration
to rule out other possible conditions (e.g. lymphoma) in the acute phase. However, it was firmly refused by the patient. Ten days later,
follow-up CE-MRI showed dramatic improvement of the intraorbital and extracranial findings, of the dural thickening and of the temporal
vasogenic edema, with complete regression of brain enhancement (Figs. 1 and 3), making, at this stage, the biopsy unnecessary. At 6 and 12
month follow-up, the patient continued to do well and her only complaint was mild headache. Further CE-MRI follow-up at 2 years without
therapy showed return-to-normal of intraorbital structures, disappearance of intraorbital and intracranial enhancement, and persistence of a
small gliotic subcortical scar in the right temporal pole (not shown), reasonably ruling out a diagnosis of lymphoma. The patient is still
periodically seen in our Institute (now at 2.5 years), and reports no further episodes of orbital swelling nor headache.Fig. 3Intracranial
enhancement before and after steroid therapy. Coronal (a, c) and sagittal (b, d) CE T1w MR images before (upper row) and after (lower row)
steroid therapy. In the follow-up phase, CE-MRI (C-D) shows striking improvement of the dural thickening and complete regression of the
intra-axial enhancement Intracranial enhancement before and after steroid therapy. Coronal (a, c) and sagittal (b, d) CE T1w MR images
before (upper row) and after (lower row) steroid therapy. In the follow-up phase, CE-MRI (C-D) shows striking improvement of the dural
thickening and complete regression of the intra-axial enhancement In our patient, the subcortical temporal pole enhancement, which increased
in the delayed phase (Fig. 2), represented the intra-axial consequences of the intracranial orbital pseudotumor extension, which, to our
knowledge, have never been previously described. In our opinion, a possible pathophysiological explanation of the observed findings may take
origin from the compression of the loco-regional venous system, due to the meningeal extension of the pseudotumor, even if small, as
demonstrated by the impaired visualization of the right spheno-parietal sinus at MR venography. It is known that cerebral venous thrombosis
could lead to both vasogenic edema and brain parenchymal enhancement , which can be either reversible or irreversible , allowing us to
hypothesize the presence of sinus venous compression in the present case, with pathophysiological consequences similar to vein thrombosis. A
state of venous hypertension of the cortical veins of the temporal pole, without actual thrombosis (that was not present in any of the CE-
MRI scans), may thus have led to hampered venous drainage, with damage of the blood–brain barrier with increased permeability and CE in the
temporal lobe ensuing as a functional consequence, which resolved after successful therapy (Fig. 3). The associated vasogenic edema was
therefore due to the venous hypertension and not to the orbital pseudotumor mass itself, as also supported by the discrepancy between the
small actual bulk of the intracranial pseudotumoral tissue and the large extent of intra-axial vasogenic edema (Figs. 1, 2 and 3). We have
reviewed all orbital pseudotumor cases with intracranial extension that we could retrieve in the literature (Table 1). Compared to our
patient, most cases exhibited somewhat similar features, such as the extra-axial involvement of MCF – CS, and mild vasogenic edema as the
only intra-axial finding. However, none of them showed intra-axial enhancement and large subcortical edema, thus mimicking intra-axial
pathology, which, instead, were demonstrated in our case using delayed CE-MRI acquisitions. We could also document a complete regression of
the intra/extra-cranial findings, due to serial MRI scans over a 2-year follow-up, not available in most other reported cases. In
conclusion, this case serves as a reminder that chronic inflammatory orbital pseudotumor can extend intracranially, possibly inducing
serious neurological symptoms, and even showing MRI changes mimicking intra-axial pathology. Although invasive orbital pseudotumors are
uncommon, they should be considered in the differential diagnosis of orbital masses extending beyond the confines of the bony orbit. CE-MRI
is the method of choice to evaluate both extracranial and intracranial pathology, possibly with delayed acquisitions, and may help, along
with biopsy, in recognizing these rare findings and in monitoring the appropriate therapy. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor
of this journal. Anterior cranial fossa Contrast-enhanced MRI Cavernous sinus Computed tomography Fluid attenuated inversion recovery
Internal carotid artery Middle cranial fossa Magnetic resonance imaging Superior orbital fissure Short tau inversion recovery Echo time
Inversion time Repetition time Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions ET
conceived the case report and helped to draft the manuscript. FC contributed to the acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data. LU, SC
participated in the design of the study and drafted the manuscript. FC contributed to the clinical management of the patient. GL, AB
participated in critically revising the article for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
