Primary effusion lymphomas (PEL) are associated with human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) and usually occur in immunocompromised individuals.
However, there are numerous reports of HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphomas with unknown aetiology. Here we characterize an HHV-8-unrelated
PEL-like lymphoma in an elderly woman who was negative for human immunodeficiency viruses 1 and 2, and hepatitis B and C. The woman was,
however, a carrier of an inherited-chromosomally-integrated human herpesvirus-6A (iciHHV-6A) genome in one 19q telomere. The iciHHV-6A
genome was complete in blood DNA, encoding a full set of protein-coding genes. Interestingly, the entire iciHHV-6A genome was absent from
the HHV-8-unrelated-PEL-like lymphoma cells despite retention of both copies of chromosome 19. The somatic loss of the 19q-iciHHV-6A genome
occurred very early during lymphoma development and we propose it occurred via telomere-loop formation and excision to release a circular
viral genome that was subsequently lost. Whether release of the HHV-6A genome from the telomere contributed to lymphomagenesis, or was
coincidental, remains unclear but this event may have deregulated the expression of HHV-6A or 19q genes or else disrupted telomere function.
To establish the frequency and importance of iciHHV-6 loss from telomeres, the HHV-6 copy number should be assessed in tumours that arise in
iciHHV-6 carriers. Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) is a B cell malignancy, usually arising in immunocompromised, human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)-infected individuals, associated with latent infection of human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8; also known as Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus)12. PEL is confined anatomically to the serous cavities, with no lymph nodal involvement, and is a plasmablastic disease
associated with a very poor prognosis. Initially, PEL was thought to be universally associated with HHV-8 infection. However, it has become
clear more recently that primary effusion-like lymphoma may also occur in HIV-negative individuals who are not overtly immunosuppressed, and
in the absence of HHV-8 infection3. These lymphomas have collectively been termed HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphomas4. HHV-8-unrelated PEL-
like lymphomas are heterogeneous but they differ immunophenotypically and genotypically from HHV-8-positive PEL and may more closely
resemble diffuse, large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) or Burkitt lymphoma (BL), or even plasmacytoid malignancies and may constitute a rare but
distinct pathological entity (reviewed in56). The mature B-cell phenotype of most cases of HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma with expression
of CD19 and CD20 is strikingly different from regular HHV-8-associated PEL, which lack expression of B-cell antigens. For reasons that are
unclear, most reported cases have involved elderly or very elderly patients from Japan. Patients who are able to tolerate systemic
chemotherapy appear to do well, again in contrast to patients with regular PEL. HHV-6A and HHV-6B are closely related viruses but distinct
species of the subfamily Betaherpesvirinae, family Herpesviridae7. In western societies, infection typically occurs in early childhood in
over 95% of individuals. HHV-6B usually causes a mild, febrile illness (roseola infantum or exanthema subitum) in children, whereas HHV-6A
has not been associated with particular symptoms. HHV-6A or -6B can persist in a latent form in most individuals but, if reactivation
occurs, it can have severe consequences, particularly in immunocompromised individuals8. The HHV-6A and -6B genomes contain over 100 open
reading frames (ORFs) encoding 97 genes that are expressed in an ordered manner during active infection91011. The roles of many HHV-6 genes
are poorly understood but like other herpesviruses, HHV-6 is able to circumvent the pathway that results in p53 mediated cell cycle arrest
and so is able to replicate12. Several HHV-6 genes, including DR6/DR7 (ORF-1), U14 and U19, encode proteins that interact with p53 directly
of indirectly13141516. Interestingly the U14 protein has been detected with p53 in virions and its role is under intense
investigation141718. Although in vitro experiments suggest that HHV-6 DNA can transform cells in culture19, investigation of the
relationship between HHV-6 and cancer is controversial as a clear pathogenic role has not been demonstrated 20,21. HHV-6 DNA, viral proteins
or particles are often detected in haematological and other malignancies, which at least demonstrates that HHV-6 is an opportunistic
pathogen that can readily reactivate in some cancer settings20. A distinctive feature of both viruses is the capacity for integration into
telomeres, which consist of repetitive (TTAGGG)n sequences that form nucleoprotein-capping structures at the ends of chromosomes22. The rate
of germline telomeric integration is unknown, but a small proportion of individuals, approximately 0.8% of the London-based population in
the UK, have inherited a copy of chromosomally-integrated HHV-6 (ciHHV-6)23, and can transmit it to their children. Integration is mediated
by HHV-6 sequences (T1 and T2), which are homologous to telomeric DNA and located within both copies of the terminal direct repeats
(DR)242526. The two DRs are termed DRL and DRR, and are located at the left and right ends of the annotated viral genome, respectively.
Recently, it has been shown that inherited ciHHV-6 (iciHHV-6) represents a state of latency, as full viral reactivation was detected in an
immunocompromised child with iciHHV-6A and hemophagocytic syndrome27. In addition reactivated virus has been shown to pass from iciHHV-6
mothers to non-iciHHV-6 children via the placenta28. This raises the possibility that telomeric integration is also a form of latency for
the majority of the population, with lifelong HHV-6 latency occurring in a small proportion of somatic cells. Here, we describe a woman who
was diagnosed with PEL-like lymphoma in the absence of infection by HHV-8, HIV and other viruses, and who had iciHHV-6A in one 19q telomere.
We show that the HHV-6A genome was absent from the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma cells, and propose that telomere-loop (t-loop)
formation within the iciHHV-6 genome followed by excision may have released the viral genome from the telomere24252930. Loss of the iciHHV-6
genome could either have been a coincidental ‘passenger’ event during cancer initiation or alternatively the disruption caused by loss of
the viral genome from the telomere may have contributed to the development of the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma by a novel mechanism. A
previously well, 73 year-old lady (numbered 1500), with no prior history of infections, presented with an 8-week history of left-sided
pleuritic chest pain and breathlessness. CT scan revealed a medium-sized pleural effusion with no lymphadenopathy or extranodal masses
within the thorax, abdomen or pelvis. Drainage of the pleural fluid showed pleomorphic lymphoid blasts (CD45+, CD20+, CD79a+, CD3−, CD10−).
Bone marrow aspirate and trephine were normal and additional clinical details are given in the materials and methods. Viral serological
studies showed that a peripheral blood sample was negative for HIV-1 and HIV-2, hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus. PCR assays for
HHV-8 and EBV did not detect either viral genome in DNA extracted from a peripheral blood sample (taken at diagnosis) or in the pleural
fluid sample (predominantly lymphoma cells). Consequently a diagnosis of HHV-8 unrelated PEL-like lymphoma was made. Chromosome analysis of
R-banded metaphases from short-term cultures of the pleural fluid revealed the karyotype: 48~49,XX,
+X,der(2)t(2;12)(q14;q12),der(3)t(2;3)(q13;q11),t(3;22)(q27;q11),del(4)(q26q28),t(6;12)(p23;p12),del(6)(q14q22),add(7)(p14),
+11,del(11)(q14), +12,der(12)t(4;12)(q13;q23~23)del(4)(q24q28),i(21)(q10) (Supplementary Fig. S1). The t(3;22)(q27;q11), was confirmed by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses using a BCL6 break-apart and spanning probe31 as well as break-apart and spanning assays
for the IGL locus32. The pleural effusion completely resolved following six cycles of R-CHOP therapy, and the patient remained in
continuous, complete remission for the next nine years, eventually dying from complications of late-onset diabetes with no evidence of
recurrent lymphoma. Seeking a potential viral aetiology for the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma, further viral PCR studies were performed
and the HHV-6 U11 gene was detected at approximately 106 viral copies/μg of DNA in peripheral blood, consistent with one copy of the viral
genome/cell. DNA sequence analysis showed that HHV-6A was present, rather than HHV-6B. The presence of HHV-6A at one copy per cell suggested
iciHHV-6 rather than viral reactivation. This was confirmed by metaphase FISH, which showed the iciHHV-6 to be present at a telomere of
chromosome 19q (Fig. 1a). HHV-6 sequences were also detected in hair follicle DNA from the patient. The patient’s two elderly brothers (1499
and 1501) were also positive for iciHHV6A at 19q (Fig. 1b); both were well and lacked serious medical problems. Telomeric integration was
confirmed in all three siblings by using STELA with the DR1R primer25. The generation of STELA products of variable length in each donor
demonstrated the presence of a telomere on the end of DRL in the ciHHV-6A genome (Fig. 1c). FISH using HHV-6 probes failed to detect viral
integration in the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma cells in the pleural fluid (1500-T). In addition, semi-quantitative PCR analysis of
amplicons covering the full length of the HHV-6A genome showed reduction of viral sequences in pleural fluid (1500-T) compared with blood
DNA (1500-Bl; Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. S2). We verified that the blood and tumour sample were from the same individual (1500) using
genetic profiling with the hypervariable minisatellites, MS1 (D1S7) and B6.73334 (Supplementary Fig. S1). The loss of HHV-6 sequence from
1500-T was confirmed by ddPCR analysis of HHV-6A targets relative to the human RPP30 gene. Thus, copy number analysis of the HHV-6A U38 and
U7 sequences showed that the HHV-6A genome was present at 0.1 copies/cell in the pleural fluid sample in comparison to 1.1 copies/cell in
blood DNA (1500-Bl) and similar levels in the two brothers, 1499-Bl and 1501-Bl (Table 1). The expected 2:1 ratio of DR6:U38 sequences in
the HHV-6A genome was constant in the 1500-Bl and 1500-T samples. This suggests that the entire HHV-6A genome with both DR regions was lost
from the lymphoma, as there is no evidence that one DR region was retained in the telomere25. The 1500-Bl and 1500-T were heterozygous at
three polymorphic STRs on chromosome 19, indicating that loss of the iciHHV-6 genome from the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma had not
occurred simply through loss of the chromosome carrying the integration (Fig. 1e). One allele at the distal STR, D19S254 (1.4 Mb from the
19q telomere), had undergone a somatic mutation in the lymphoma that also appeared clonal in origin. The iciHHV-6A genome was oriented with
DRL located towards the terminus of the chromosome, as expected (Fig. 1c)2425. The DRL-T2 region was 84 bp in size, comprising 14 (TTAGGG)
repeats in 1499-Bl, 1500-Bl and 1501-Bl, and was located adjacent to the P2 packaging sequence in DRL. The terminal DRL-P1 packaging
sequence was absent and replaced by (TTAGGG)n repeats, whereas the internal DRR-P1 packaging sequence was retained and located adjacent to a
2.1 kb DRR-T1 region (Fig. 1c). In summary, the terminal P1 and P2 sequences of DRL and DRR respectively were lost from the ends of the
HHV-6A genome upon integration into the 19q telomere, as shown previously2425. Overlapping amplicons covering the iciHHV-6A genome were
generated from 1500-Bl, the residual viral DNA in 1500-T, and 1501-Bl. All the amplicons were the expected sizes, indicating the absence of
large insertions or deletions disrupting the viral genome (Supplementary Fig. S3). The amplicons were pooled from each sample, and the
sequence of the ciHHV6-A genome was determined by using next-generation sequencing methods. Three regions (T1 and other repeat regions)
could not be formally closed because of their lengths. Assembly of sequence data for 1500-Bl and 1500-T showed that the ciHHV-6 genomes in
these samples were identical to those of 1501-Bl. The sequence was deposited in GenBank under accession number KT355575. Comparisons with
the annotation of HHV-6A strain U1102 (NC_001664) indicated that the sequence contained the full set of protein-coding regions, although
gene U86 was not formally validated because of the presence of a large repeat array in this protein-coding region. Overall, the integrated
genome was more distantly related (97.2–97.3% identity) to HHV-6A strains U1102 (NC_001664), GS (KC465951 and KJ123690) and AJ (KP257584)
than these are from each other (98.4–99.1%). The sequence across the start of gene U83 is the same as in strain U1102, indicating that the
iciHHV-6A in this family encodes both the long and short forms of the U83 chemokine35. The U14 protein, which interacts with p53141718 is
almost identical in amino acid sequence in strains U1102 and GS (99.3% identity), but interestingly more diverged in 1500 (93.4% identity to
strains U1102 and GS). Similarly, gene U90, which is located in the immediate early 1 locus and plays important roles in active infection
and regulation of latency36, shows a greater amino acid sequence divergence between 1500 and strain U1102 (91.6% identity) or GS (92.3%
identity) than between strains U1102 and GS (95.3% identity). Further investigation will be required to determine whether the sequence
divergence of these or other HHV-6A proteins influences the probability of viral genome release, reactivation or contribution to
oncogenesis. Using STELA with the DR1R primer, we have shown previously that the 19q iciHHV-6A-associated telomere was the shortest measured
in blood DNA from 1499, 1500 and 1501, when compared to telomeres at 12q, 17p and XpYp25. Here, we measured the length of these telomeres in
the pleural fluid sample, 1500-T (Fig. 2a, b). The 12q, 17p and XpYp telomeres were all significantly longer in 1500-T than in 1500-Bl
(Table 2), indicating lengthening in the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma cells. Limited data were obtained from the iciHHV-6A-associated
telomere in the 1500-T DNA, consistent with the low copy number of the HHV-6A genome in the cells from the pleural fluid. In contrast to the
12q, 17p and XpYp telomeres, the iciHHV-6A-associated telomere in the pleural fluid (1500-T) was not lengthened (median length 3.1 kb; Table
2) but had the same length to that measured in blood DNA, 1500-Bl (p = 0.8694). This is consistent with the iciHHV-6A-associated telomere
molecules in the pleural fluid originating from normal cells in this sample rather than the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma cells. We have
shown previously that iciHHV-6B can be unstable and undergo truncation events, releasing partial or complete circular molecules of the viral
genome25. We proposed that such excision events are mediated by t-loop formation between the single-stranded telomeric overhang and internal
telomere-like repeats at T2 and T1 in DRL or DRR. Here, we did not detect ciHHV-6A truncation events at DRL-T2 in 1500-Bl, 1500-T, 1499-Bl
or 1501-Bl (Fig. 2c). However, PCR using primers UDL61R and U100Fw2, which, because of their locations and orientations, do not amplify from
the iciHHV-6A, detected large, low abundance molecules in 1501-Bl (Fig. 2d). These amplicons included a single DR containing both packaging
sequences (P1 and P2), and are likely to have arisen via recombination between DRL and DRR in the ciHHV-6A genome, resulting in release of
the viral genome as a circular molecule. PEL represents a distinctive form of B-cell malignancy. It arises in the context of HHV-8
infection, mostly in HIV-infected individuals and the tumour cells contain HHV-8 genomes with frequent EBV co-infection. In contrast,
HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma can arise in normal or in immunocompromised patients and they have a different immunophenotype from
HHV-8-associated PEL56. The aetiology of HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphomas is unknown. Here, we have reported an HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like
lymphoma, arising in a non-immunocompromised although elderly woman, which is associated with iciHHV-6A at a 19q telomere. The iciHHV-6A in
the patient, 1500, and her brothers was intact, although, as expected, it lacked the terminal DRL-P1 and DRR-P2 packaging and cleavage
sequences (Fig. 1c)2425. Sequence analysis showed that the ciHHV-6A genomes were identical in the three siblings and comprised a full set of
ORFs when compared to the reference HHV-6A strain U1102. The iciHHV-6A genome in this family is slightly more diverged from the HHV-6A
strains sequenced previously (U1102, GS and AJ3738) than they are from each other. Further investigation is needed to determine whether this
is functionally significant. Using semi-quantitative PCR and ddPCR, we showed that the entire viral genome is reduced from approximately 1
to 0.1 copies/cell in the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma sample (1500-T). Moreover, the residual viral DNA is associated with a short
telomere, as detected in 1500-Bl DNA25, whereas three other telomeres (12q, 17p and XpYp) were lengthened in 1500-T. Telomere lengthening
and maintenance is a hallmark of cancer cells as it is required for replicative immortality. The majority of cancers (approximately 85%)
express telomerase, which stabilizes and maintains telomeres within in a fairly discrete length range. In contrast, approximately 15% of
cancers activate the Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT) mechanism. Telomeres in ALT+ cells are very heterogeneous in length and can
show large fluctuations in length, as a consequence of the recombination-based mechanism that involves strand invasion and copying between
telomeres39. From the telomere length profiles we observed in the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma sample (1500-T), we infer that
telomerase had been activated, as seen in most hematological malignancies. Together the low copy number of the iciHHV-6A genome and the
absence of lengthening at the associated telomere, suggests that the residual ciHHV-6A DNA in the pleural effusion sample (1500-T) comes
from normal cells. Loss of the iciHHV-6A genome in the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma was not a result of loss of heterozygosity, as both
copies of chromosome 19 were retained. Altogether, the data indicate that loss of the 19q iciHHV-6A occurred very early during
HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma development. The presence of iciHHV-6 causes instability in the telomere carrying the insertion, and this
can result in truncations at DRL-T2. We have proposed that these truncations may occur via t-loop formation at DRL-T2, accompanied by
excision of the aberrant t-loop25. We did not detect DRL-T2 truncations in 1500 or her brothers (Fig. 2c), but T2 in this 19q-iciHHV-6A is
short, just (TTAGGG)13, which may reduce the frequency of t-loop formation in this region. Further work is ongoing to understand the
relationship between the length of T2 and frequency of DRL-T2 truncations. We assume similar truncation events occur at the internally
located DRR-T1 (Fig. 1c) but we cannot use PCR-based assays to distinguish truncations at DRR-T1 from STELA products that represent the
telomere at the end of DRL-T1, because the DR regions are identical. The U100Fw2-UDL61R PCR assay identified amplicons derived from
recombination between DRL and DRR in 1501 but not the other two siblings (Fig. 2d), indicating that the proposed viral genome excision
events can occur at a low frequency in blood DNA. As the heterozygosity and cytogenetic analyses (Supplementary Fig. S1) show that the two
copies of chromosome 19 are intact in the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma (1500-T), we propose that loss of the iciHHV-6A genome was not a
result of generalised genome instability during lymphomagenesis. Rather, loss of the iciHHV-6A appears to have been a specific, clonal event
that occurred very early during the lymphoma development. This event could have been mediated by t-loop formation between DRL and DRR
leading to excision2930 and release of the viral genome from the telomere in a somatic cell of patient 1500. It has been shown that iciHHV-6
can reactivate, leading to expression of viral genes and production of viral particles2728, but it is unclear whether the 19q-iciHHV-6A or
the release of the viral genome from the telomere contributed directly to lymphoma formation in this woman. On epidemiological grounds,
given the frequency of its occurrence in the general population, it seems unlikely that iciHHV-6 per se plays a significant oncogenic role.
Furthermore, recent surveys indicate that iciHHV-6 carriers do not have an increased risk of developing classical Hodgkin Lymphoma40 nor
childhood acute lymphoblastic or myeloid leukemias4142. However, somatic loss of the 19q-iciHHV-6A in the patient described here could have
resulted in the transient presence of a circular HHV-6A genome and expression of viral genes that contributed to disruption of the cell
cycle in this elderly patient. Alternatively and more likely, loss of the iciHHV-6A genome could have disrupted the telomere function or the
expression of adjacent 19q subtelomeric genes43 and so contributed to the initiation of the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma, without
HHV-6A gene expression or viral reactivation. By extrapolation, excision of ciHHV-6 by telomere-driven processes from somatic cells in other
iciHHV-6 carriers, or perhaps from somatic cells harbouring latent ciHHV-6 in non-iciHHV-6 individuals, could have broader effects that may
depend on the chromosome carrying the integration, the telomere length in the tissue where somatic loss occurs and therefore the age of the
individual. To determine whether somatic loss of iciHHV-6 is a novel mechanism that can contribute to oncogenesis, we suggest that copy
number of HHV-6 should be assessed, using sensitive ddPCR, in tumours arising in iciHHV-6 carriers. The patient, 1500, presented with left-
sided pleuritic chest pain and breathlessness. Initial investigations revealed the patient’s haemoglobin at 12.5 g/L, a white cell count of
4.2 × 109/L (neutrophils 3.28 × 109/L, lymphocytes 0.7 × 109/L), platelet count of 226 × 109/L, and normal lactic dehydrogenase, kidney and
liver function tests. Peripheral blood immunophenotyping at diagnosis showed a moderate lymphopenia with mild CD4+ T-cell lymphopenia (a CD4
count of 0.32 × 109/L; normal range 0.5–1.8 × 109/L). The CD4:CD8 ratio was normal, and peripheral blood B cells were polyclonal. Serum IgG
levels were slightly reduced (4.4 g/L; normal range 6–16 g/L), but IgM and IgA levels were normal. A low level of IgG kappa paraprotein
(0.4 g/L) was also detected. In line with the presence of t(3;22)(q27;q11) in the karyotype obtained from short-term cultures of the pleural
fluid, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses using a BCL6 break-apart (Abbott Laboratories) and spanning probe31 as well as
break-apart and spanning assays for the IGL locus32, confirmed chromosomal breakpoints involving BCL6 and IGL respectively as well as
BCL6-IGL fusion in the vast majority of cells. There was no evidence for breakpoints or amplifications involving MYC on chromosome 8q24 or
the IGH locus on 14q32, using break-apart probes for both loci (Abbott Laboratories). Peripheral blood (1500-Bl) and PEL (1500-T) samples
from the patient 1500 and DNA samples from her two brothers (1499 and 1501) were obtained for further analysis following informed consent
and approval from the local Research Ethics Committee (Protocol 06/Q2501/122) in accordance with approved guidelines (Declaration of
Helsinki). HHV-6 DNA was detected, by quantitative PCR of the U11 gene, in a peripheral blood sample from 1500 at diagnosis (Micropathology
Ltd, Coventry, UK), and showed approximately 106 viral copies/μg of DNA, consistent with one copy of the viral genome/cell. DNA sequence
analysis showed that HHV-6A was involved, rather than HHV-6B. HHV-6 sequences were detected in metaphase chromosomes by FISH4445 using
pooled clones: pMF311–12, pMF210–8 and pMF220–2146 prepared and labeled by standard procedures32. The iciHHV-6A genome in each DNA sample
was amplified using 32 pairs of overlapping primers (Sup. Table 1). Each 10 μl PCR reaction contained 7.5 ng genomic DNA, 0.9 μl PCR buffer
[final concentration: 1 mM each dNTP, 45 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8), 11 mM (NH4)2SO4, 113 μg/ml bovine serum albumin, 4.5 mM MgCl2, 6.7 mM
2-mercaptoethanol and 4.4 μM EDTA (pH 8.0)]4748, 0.3 μM each primer (forward and reverse), 0.1 μM Tris and 0.1 μl of an 8:1 ratio of Taq
polymerase (5 U/μl, Kapa Biosystems) and Pwo polymerase (2.5 U/μl, Genaxxon Bioscience). Thermal cycling conditions were 96 °C for
2 minutes, followed by 35 cycles (32 cycles for DR) of 96 °C for 10 s, 52–62 °C for 30 s and 68 °C for 4–10 minutes, and then a final
extension step at 68 °C for 10 minutes. The 32 amplicons from each DNA sample were pooled and used to prepare barcoded libraries and
templates according to the manufacturer’s protocols for sequencing on a MiSeq sequencer (Illumina) or an IonTorrent personal genome
sequencer (Life Technologies). The MiSeq read data for 1501-Bl were assembled de novo into contigs by using ABySS v. 1.5.249. A draft
sequence was generated using scaffold builder50 to order the contigs against the reference HHV-6A strain U1102 sequence (NC_001664). Gaps
were closed by using Megamerger51, GapFiller v. 1–1152 and custom Perl scripts, or by manual Sanger sequencing. The integrity of the
resulting sequence was verified by aligning it against the read data by using BWA v. 0.6.2-r12653 and visualizing the alignment by using
Tablet v. 1.13.08.0554. Data for 1500-Bl and 1500-T were generated on both the MiSeq and IonTorrent platforms, and were aligned against the
1501-Bl data by using BWA and visualized by using Tablet. The DNA concentration was determined from multiple spectrophotometer readings
(OD260; NanoDrop 1000, Thermo Scientific). The 10 μl PCRs contained 10 ng genomic DNA, 1 × PCR buffer (described above), 0.01 M Tris, 0.3 μM
each primer (primer pairs covering the HHV-6 genome are shown in Sup. Table 1), 0.04 U/μl Taq polymerase (Kapa Biosystems) and 0.004 U/μl
Pwo (Genaxxon Bioscience). Thermal cycling conditions were 96 °C for 2 minutes, followed by 30 or 32 cycles of 96 °C for 10 s, 56–62 °C for
30 s and 68 °C for 2–10 minutes (varied according to amplicon length), and then a final extension step at 68 °C for 10 minutes. Upon
completion, 2 μl of each PCR was size-separated by agarose gel electrophoresis in the presence of 0.5 μg/ml ethidium bromide. Droplet-
digital PCR (ddPCR) copy number analysis was conducted on the QX200 platform (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Herts, UK). Duplex ddPCR assays
incorporated a commercially available endogenous control assay for the human RPP30 gene (Bio-Rad Laboratories) and assays for the HHV-6 U38
(DNA polymerase) or HHV-6 U7 genes40. Copy number analysis of the HHV-6A DR6 gene (present in both DRL and DRR) was conducted in the same
manner using forward primer 5′-GAAACTGTAACGGCCACGTT-3′, reverse primer 5′-GTGCTCCGCCACGACTAC-3′ and probe 5′-HEX-CGCCGCCGCCGTTACTGTC-
BHQ1-3′. In all three duplex assays, the reporter dyes were FAM and HEX for the control and viral components, respectively, with BHQ1 as a
dark quencher. Prior to ddPCR, 1 μg of the DNA to be assayed for the U38 and DR6 genes was digested with 20 U HindIII. The RPP30/U7
reactions were performed using the previously described ‘in reaction’ digest technique40. The RPP30/U38 and RPP30/DR6 reactions were
performed in duplicate, and the results were combined using the ‘merge’ function of the QuantaSoft analysis software v1.4.0. All reactions
contained in excess of 10,000 droplets. The primers used to amplify the D19S252, D19S246 and D19S254 STRs were described previously55. Each
10 μl PCR reaction consisted of 10 ng genomic DNA, 0.4 μM each primer, 1 × buffer A (Kapa Biosystems), 0.2 mM dNTPs and 0.05 U/μl Taq
polymerase (Kapa Biosystems). Thermal cycling conditions were 96 °C for 2 minutes, followed by 28 cycles of 96 °C for 10 s, 56–62 °C for
30 s (the temperature depending on the STR), 68 °C for 2 minutes, and a final extension step of 68 °C for 10 minutes. PCR products were
size-separated in a 3% MetaPhor (Lonza) agarose gel. STELA was conducted as described previously, using genomic DNA (250 pg/reaction) for
telomeres at 12q (12qSTELA primer), 17p (17p6 primer) and XpYp (XpYpE2 primer), and 500 pg/reaction for the ciHHV-6-associated telomere
(DR1R primer)25,3456. Individual amplicons, detected by phosphor-image analysis, were sized using the Imagequant software (Typhoon 9400, GE
Healthcare) with known size markers (GeneRuler 1 kb and GeneRuler High Range DNA ladder, Fermentas), and the length of the flanking sequence
was subtracted. The telomere lengths were presented as scatter plots with median and interquartile ranges. Telomere lengths in the blood and
PEL samples were compared using the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test (GraphPad Prism; GraphPad Software Inc., CA, USA). Truncations in the
T2 region of DRL (DRL-T2) were detected by using STELA with the HHV-6A-specific UDL61R primer (Supplementary Table S1) and genomic DNA
(1 ng/reaction). Control STELAs were performed at the same time with primer DR1R (0.5 ng/reaction). Extra-chromosomal circular HHV-6 DNA was
detected essentially as described previously25, with minor modifications. Genomic DNA (90 ng/reaction) was amplified in 30 μl volumes by
using primers UDL61R and U100Fw2 at 0.3 μM (primer positions shown in Fig. 1). Thermal cycling conditions were 96 °C for 1.5 minutes,
followed by 26 cycles of 96 °C for 10 s, 62 °C for 30 s and 68 °C for 15 minutes, and then a final extension step of 68 °C for 10 minutes.
Control PCRs using primers UDL61R/DR3F or U100Fw2/DR3R were conducted at the same time. Amplified products (20 μl) were size-separated in
0.8% agarose gels and detected by Southern blot hybridization to a DR3 probe. Accession codes: The sequence of the 1501-iciHHV-6A genome was
deposited in GenBank under accession number KT355575. How to cite this article: Zhang, E. et al. HHV-8-unrelated primary effusion-like
lymphoma associated with clonal loss of inherited chromosomally-integrated human herpesvirus 6A from the telomere of chromosome 19q. Sci.
Rep. 6, 22730; doi: 10.1038/srep22730 (2016). We thank most sincerely Prof. Mark Jobling, Dr Chiara Batini, Dr Jon Wetton and Mrs Rita
Neumann (University of Leicester) for their help with next-generation sequencing and advice about data analysis; Magret Ratjen, Stefan Gesk,
Lana Harder, Holger Tönnies (Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel & University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein) and Dr Maria Fraser (UHL-NHS
Trust, Leicester) for their technical and other assistance. Funding from UK Medical Research Council [G0901657 to N.J.R.]; UK Medical
Research Council [MC_UU_12014/3 to AJD]; Wellcome Trust Institutional Strategtic Support Fund [WT097828MF to NJR]; Conacyt, Mexico [to
A.H.-B.]. Author Contributions E.Z., V.E.C., A.H.-B., Y.H., A.B. conducted various aspects of the experimental work that contributed data
for the figures; G.S.W. and A.D. generated some of the NGS data and conducted the bioinformatic analysis; E.N., R.S., A.M., I.K., S.J. and
M.J.S.D. were all involved in characterisation of the patient and the HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma that contributed data for figures;
A.D., R.J., R.S., M.S.J.D. and N.J.R. were responsible for the design and analysis of various aspects of the work. The paper was written by
NJR with input from M.S.J.D., R.S., A.D. and R.J. All authors reviewed the manuscript. (a) FISH on metaphase chromosomes from 1500-Bl
(blood). The green labeled HHV-6 probe showed HHV-6 sequence at the telomere of chromosome 19q, a probe for centromere 20 (red signals)
served as a control (b). Pedigree of family with iciHHV-6A at 19q. (c) Organisation of iciHHV-6A in the 19q telomere. Diagram shows location
of priming sites for DR1R, U100Fw2 and UDL61R. T1 and T2 are the imperfect and perfect arrays of viral encoded (TTAGGG)n repeats
respectively. P1 and P2 show the locations of the PAC1 and PAC2 sequences retained in the integrated viral genome. (d) Examples of semi-
quantitative analysis of two HHV-6A amplicons (41 and 15) in 1500-Bl and 1500-T (pleural fluid containing HHV-8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma
cells). (e) 1500 was heterozygous at three STRs on chromosome 19 (D19S252, D19S246, D19A254) in blood DNA (Bl) and heterozygosity is
retained in the lymphoma (T). Black arrow shows the mutated D19S254 allele. (a) An example STELA blot showing amplified telomere molecules
at iciHHV-6A (DR1R primer), 12q, 17p and XpYp in the pleural fluid (1500-T). (b) Scatter plots of the compiled 1500-T telomere length data
showing median length and inter-quartile ranges. (c) PCR-based truncation assay using the UDL61R primer in STELA in the patient’s blood
(1500-Bl) or pleural fluid (1500-T) and in DNA from the two brothers (1499 and 1501). The arrow shows the expected location of DRL-T2
truncation products (d) Amplification with U100Fw2 and UDL61R primers generated products (grey arrow head) in the DNA from brother 1501.
These amplicons show the presence of low abundance extra-chromosomal circular HHV-6A molecules. aCopy number relative to the human RPP30
gene. bCI, confidence interval. cThe U38 data, DR6 data and the CI were obtained from duplicate assays, and the data were merged as
described in Materials and Methods. aMedian telomere length and inter-quartile range (bp). bThe telomere length distributions in DNA from
blood and cells in the pleural fluid were compared using a non-parametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov test; p values: ns not significant; *0.01 to
0.05 significant; **0.001 to 0.01 very significant; ***0.0001 to 0.001 and ****<0.0001 extremely significant.
