Kartagener syndrome (KS) is a rare disorder characterized by the triad of chronic sinusitis, bronchiectasis, and situs inversus. A 23-year-
old man was admitted to our hospital because of recurrent cough with purulent expectoration, which had occurred intermittently for the past
ten years. During the past 3 years, the episode frequency was 3–4 times per year. He was diagnosed with pulmonary infection and
bronchiectasis of the left upper lobe, situs inversus, and KS. We concluded that the damaged left middle lobe was the source of repeat
pulmonary infections. Thus the left middle lobe resection was performed to remove the source of the lung infection. The post-operative
course was successful and pneumonia was apparently resolved during the 6 months’ follow-up period. We further describe this case in the
following report. Kartagener syndrome (KS) is a rare recessive autosomal disease with an incidence of approximately 1 in 32,000 live births
[1, 2]. It is characterized by primary ciliary dyskinesia accompanied by sinusitis, bronchiectasis, and situs inversus . Our case was
diagnosed with synchronous Kartagener syndrome, pulmonary infection and bronchiectasis of the left upper lobe. Here, we reported the left
middle lobectomy for a KS patient with bronchiectasis, which has been rarely reported in the literature. A 23-year-old unmarried man was
admitted to the Department of thoracic surgery of Renji hospital (Shanghai, China) because of recurrent cough with purulent expectoration,
which had occurred intermittently for the past ten years. During the past 3 years, the episode frequency was 3–4 times per year, and an
increased frequency occurred over the past 6 months. He had seen a respiratory physician many times and was diagnosed with pneumonia due to
bronchiectasis. Additionally, he had received several courses of intravenous antibiotic therapy over the past 6 months, however, frequent
relapse occurred after antibiotic therapy. He had no fever, dyspnea and hemoptysis. Further questioning revealed that the patient used to
suffer from sinusitis since his teenage years, presenting symptoms including repeated nasal congestion and nasal discharge. The patient
acknowledged that he had been diagnosed with dextrocardia in childhood. He had no brothers or sisters, and his parents were healthy.
Yellowish discharge could be observed in the nasal cavity without obvious press-pain on paranasal sinus areas. The thoracic wall had no
deformities. Chest auscultation revealed crepitations in the left infrascapular region and normal heart sounds on the right side. The apex
beat was palpable over the fifth intercostal space on the right side of chest. The other physical and systemic examinations were normal.
Hemogram revealed a total leukocyte count of 11.0 × 109/L (normal range: 3.97–9.15 × 109/L), a neutrophil percentage of 78.5% (normal range:
50–70%), and a hemoglobin of 150 g/L (normal range: 131–172 g/L). Liver functions and renal functions were normal, and the erythrocyte
sedimentation rate was 40 mm/H. Sputum smear examination for Mycobacterium tuberculosis was negative, and the blood tuberculosis antibody
was also negative. Abdominal ultrasound revealed complete situs inversus and the organs were normal. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan
revealed a bronchiectasic appearance in the local lung tissue of the left middle lobe (Fig. 1) and dextrocardia (Fig. 2). His admission
diagnosis included pulmonary infection and bronchiectasis of the left middle lobe, situs inversus, and possible KS.Fig. 1Chest computed
tomography scan showing bronchiectasis in the local left lungFig. 2Chest computed tomography scan showing dextrocardia Chest computed
tomography scan showing bronchiectasis in the local left lung Chest computed tomography scan showing dextrocardia Paranasal sinus CT scan
revealed that his nasal mucosa obviously thickened, besides, his left maxillary sinus and ethmoidal sinus mucosa swelled obviously (Fig. 3).
The Kartagener triad of symptoms was observed in this patient, which confirmed the diagnosis of KS. His primary problem was recurrent
pneumonia due to bronchiectasis, which had to be resolved effectively. After careful examination of the chest CT, we concluded that the
bronchiectasic lung was destroyed and had clear boundaries. Regarding his situs inversus, the left lung was clearly composed of three lobes,
with lesion in the left middle lobe. There was no bronchiectasic signs in the upper or lower left lobe or in the right lung. Thus, we
concluded that the damaged left middle lobe was the source of repeat pulmonary infections. Altogether, these results suggested that this
lobe had to be resected, as the infections would otherwise not be curable.Fig. 3Chest computed tomography scan showing left ethmoidal and
maxillary sinusitis Chest computed tomography scan showing left ethmoidal and maxillary sinusitis After three days of antibiotic treatment
(2 g cefotiam through an intravenous drip), left thoracotomy was performed via left posterolateral incision under the condition of general
anesthesia. The fifth intercostal muscles were incised layer by layer, and sixth rib was cut off and opened with a rib retractor. The double
lumen endotracheal catheter (Covidien Mallinckrodt Endobronchial Tube 37Fr left; Covidien, USA) was intubated into the left main bronchus.
It was confirmed that the patient’s left lung had three lobes, and the azygos vein and superior vein cava could be exposed in the left
thoracic cavity, confirming situs inversus. The middle lobe was collapsed and consolidated (Fig. 4), although the upper and lower lobes
seemed normal and the fissures had completely developed. Before the left middle lobe was removed, the middle lobe branch of the pulmonary
artery and vein, and the bronchus of the middle lobe were excised and sutured individually with staples (Covidien, USA). After lobe was
resected, wound surface was stanched and the chest was washed with physiological saline water for 3 times. The flushing fluid was removed
and lung wound surface was sutured with 3-0 Prolene. Rib incision was sutured with No. 10 silk; muscle layers were sutured with 2-0 Johnson
ETHICON Vicryl; skin was sutured with 3-0 Johnson ETHICON Vicryl. In addition, a 28F chest tube was placed post-operatively and was removed
3 days later. The patient-controlled intravenous analgesia (PCIA) with sufentanil 0.2 mg combined with granisetron 3 mg was provided for
pain relief for 48 h. The operation was completed without complication. The final pathology examination (Fig. 5) revealed the occurrence of
bronchiectasis and hyperemia in this lobe, as well as the proliferation of lymphocytes and plasmocytes around the bronchus. The post-
operative antibiotic therapy (2 g cefotiam through an intravenous drip) lasted 7 days, and chest CT indicated left lung recovered well
without pulmonary infection. On postoperative day 8, the patient was discharged. Regular follow-up was conducted by the ear-nose-throat
(ENT) specialist and thoracic surgeons. Mucolytics, such as myrtol standardized capsules (Pohl-Boskamp GmbH & Co. KG, Germany; 0.3 g three
times a day), was taken to treat his remaining sinusitis, as administered by the ENT doctors. After 6 months of follow-up, his symptoms of
cough and purulent sputum were relieved, and his nasal congestion and discharge were alleviated. Follow-up chest X-rays confirmed no further
issues (Fig. 6).Fig. 4Consolidation of the left middle lobe (held by lung-grasping forceps)Fig. 5The histologic images of the resected left
middle lobe. A: 100 ×; B and C: 200×Fig. 6Chest X-rays showing recovery after six months follow-up Consolidation of the left middle lobe
(held by lung-grasping forceps) The histologic images of the resected left middle lobe. A: 100 ×; B and C: 200× Chest X-rays showing
recovery after six months follow-up KS patients generally present with recurrent lower respiratory tract infection and nasal sinusitis due
to ineffective mucociliary clearance . Additionally, male patients are usually sterile, as sperm motility is dependent on ciliary function .
In the present study, testing in primary ciliary dyskinesia was not performed because of the technical condition constraints in our
hospital, which was a limitation of our study. Importantly, the triad of symptoms in KS was observed in the present case, although no male
infertility was noted because sperm motility was not assessed. The left middle lobectomy in KS has rarely been reported due to the rarity of
this disorder. The present case recovered well after the left middle lobectomy. We therefore summarized the treatment method for this
disease. The primary symptom of the patient was recurrent respiratory tract infection owing to bronchiectasis in the left middle lobe. The
damaged lung was the source of the irreversible infection, if untreated, the range of the lesion would expand to further destroy the lung
tissue. It has been reported that pulmonary heart disease may occur if lung transplantation is not performed in an end-stage KS patient .
Therefore, the left lobe resection was necessary in this case. Specially, the advantage of pulmonary resection for treating chronic
bronchiectasis has been reported . During the follow-up, the respiratory tract infection did not occur any further, although the patient
suffered from occasional nasal congestion and discharge due to the ineffective mucociliary clearance. The results of the left lobectomy were
desirable for him. However, the patient should continue to see his ENT specialist for the clinical treatment of sinusitis. Importantly,
myrtol could help alleviate his symptoms. In conclusion, serious damage of the lung may occur after bronchiectasis and pneumonia in KS
patients unless a diagnosis of this rare syndrome can be confirmed and therapy is provided. Surgical resection is an acceptable method for
patients whose bronchiectasic lungs are localized within one or two lobes. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to report left
middle lobectomy for treating bronchiectasis in KS patient. The progression of bronchiectasis was halted by surgery during the immediate
post-operative follow-up period. For this reason, it should be emphasized that KS requires a high degree of suspicion for its early
diagnosis by physicians, ENT surgeons, and thoracic surgeons. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Chest CT
revealed bronchiectasis inthe left upper lobe and dextrocardia. Paranasal sinus CT scan revealed left ethmoidal and maxillary sinusitis. The
left middle lobectomy was performed and the patient recovered well after surgery. Chest CT revealed bronchiectasis inthe left upper lobe and
dextrocardia. Paranasal sinus CT scan revealed left ethmoidal and maxillary sinusitis. The left middle lobectomy was performed and the
patient recovered well after surgery. computed tomography ear-nose-throat Kartagener syndrome Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions HL participated in the design of this study, and they both performed the
statistical analysis. ZC carried out the study, together with XZ, collected important background information, and drafted the manuscript. QY
conceived of this study, and participated in the design and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. None.
