The authors report an exceptional case of collision tumor comprised of a gastric calcified stromal tumor and a pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
The pancreatic tumor was detected fortuitously on the histological exam of resection specimen. The collision tumor is defined as the
existence of two different histologic types of carcinoma that are either contiguous or intermingled. The patient was a 70-year-old male who
presented with a 6-month history of vomiting, epigastric pain and weight loss. A gastroscopy revealed a large submucosal lesion originating
in the fundus of the stomach and the biopsies were inconclusive. CT study revealed a 12x10x9 cm partially calcified mass with heterogeneous
contrast enhancement on the fundal region and greater curvature of the stomach (Figure 1). The patient underwent a total gastrectomy
associated to a distal splenopancreatectomy and segmental transverse colectomy (Figure 2). The final pathologic diagnosis was collision
tumor of gastric GIST and pancreatic adenocarcinoma (Figure 3, Figure 4). Partially calcified mass with heterogeneous contrast enhancement
on the fundal region and greater curvature of the stomach Specimen of resection Zone of collision between the gastric stromale tumor (left)
and the pancreatic adenocarcinoma (right) (HEx40) CD117 expression in stromal gastric tumor (x 10) Collision tumor has been defined as two
histologically differing tumors simultaneously involving the same organ with an equivocal intermediate transitional zone between them . Our
patient presents an exceptional case of collision tumor between two tumors arising from different organs. One case of an adenocarcinoma of
the head of the pancreas associated with a low grade gastric stromal tumor was reported; however, the exact location of the gastric tumor
was not specified . Otherwise, the synchronous occurrence of GISTs and other primary tumors is considered an uncommon entity however such
occurrence has been more frequently described in literature mainly in form of single case reports. This situation is almost always
discovered incidentally as during surgery or staging exams of the primary disease. Further, GISTs have been reported to occur synchronously
mostly with adenocarcinoma. Among the assumptions that have been invoked to explain synchronicity is that the environmental carcinogens
might affect molecular pathways that are shared by mesenchymal and epithelial cells of the digestive tract . The other particularity of our
observation is GISTâ€²s calcification which is not a usual clinicopathologic feature of this type of tumor. In a series of 29 cases, there are
only three primary GISTs containing foci of calcification (10.3%) [4, 5]. If collision tumor in the same organ is uncommon and usually
discovered incidentally; it is exceptional when it occurs between two tumors of adjacent organs. The authors declare no competing interests.
All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscripts.
