Primary tumors of the trachea are rare, with an estimated annual incidence of 2.7 new cases per million population.( 1 ) These tumors are
approximately 180 times less common than are lung tumors,( 2 ) accounting for 0.1-0.3% of all tumors.( 2 , 3 ) Their diagnosis is usually
delayed, because the symptoms are initially misinterpreted or patients are misdiagnosed as having asthma. Lobular capillary hemangioma
(LCH), also known as pyogenic granuloma, is a benign vascular tumor most commonly affecting the skin or mucous membranes (oral and nasal).
It is extremely rare among all primary tracheal tumors, and there are only few case reports in the literature.( 1 ) Here, we present the
case of a rare benign tracheal tumor presenting with recurrent hemoptysis, which was diagnosed by and treated with bronchoscopic techniques.
A 51-year-old female with a 6-month history of recurrent hemoptysis was admitted to the hospital after a significant episode of hemoptysis.
She had no other symptoms (i.e., no sputum production, dyspnea, chest pain, weight loss, excessive sweating, or fever). She had a history of
papillary thyroid carcinoma, having been submitted to total thyroidectomy and adjuvant therapy with radioactive iodine 16 years prior, with
no evidence of relapse to date. Since then, she was on a replacement treatment regimen with levothyroxine sodium. She described herself as a
nonsmoker and denied any relevant exposure to tobacco smoke. The physical examination was unremarkable. Routine laboratory tests revealed no
abnormalities. A chest X-ray was normal. A chest CT scan with contrast enhancement revealed a newly forming lesion in the left lateral wall
of the trachea (Figure 1A), with no other significant changes. Flexible bronchoscopy was performed, confirming the presence of a purple
polypoid bleeding lesion in the left lateral wall of the lower third of the trachea, without any additional findings. In order to better
control the bleeding, rigid bronchoscopy was performed, with an 8.5 mm bronchoscope (Karl Storz Instruments, Tuttlingen, Germany). The
lesion was removed en bloc with rigid forceps, resulting in significant hemorrhage, which required local instillation of cold saline and
epinephrine (1:10,000); however, bleeding control failed. Hemostasis was then achieved using laser photocoagulation (Multidiode Endolaser
30; INTERmedic Arfran S.A., Barcelona, Spain; Figure 1B). After the procedure, no additional complications resulting from the treatment were
noted. The histopathology of the tumor revealed LCH, with no signs of malignancy (Figure 2). Figure 1.In A, a chest CT scan with contrast
enhancement showing a small lesion in the left lateral wall of the trachea (red arrow). In B, bronchoscopic images confirming the presence
of a purple polypoid lesion in the left lateral wall of the lower third of the trachea; removal of the lesion (with forceps) resulted in
significant hemorrhage, which was controlled with laser photocoagulation. Figure 2.Histological examination of the lesion revealed numerous
small vessels, some of which were capillaries, arranged in a lobular pattern and separated by a fibrous stroma with accompanying acute
inflammatory changes, thus confirming the diagnosis of lobular capillary hemangioma. There were no signs of malignancy (H&E staining;
magnification ×100). Tracheal tumors are rare, and there is no clear explanation for that. Some authors suggest that the turbulent flow in
the trachea might protect the mucosa, preventing the deposit of inhaled carcinogens.( 2 ) Tracheal LCH is a benign vascular tumor and is
exceedingly rare. Typically, this tumor presents as a painless bleeding mass adhered to mucosal or cutaneous surfaces of the upper
respiratory tract, most commonly affecting the lip, nose, oral cavity, or tongue.( 4 ) Histologically, it has a distinctive lobular
arrangement of capillaries in an edematous fibroblastic stroma, and the surface is occasionally ulcerated.( 1 , 5 ) Although the
pathogenesis of LCH is unclear, various factors have been implicated, such as hormonal influence, certain drugs, viral oncogenes, Bartonella
sp. infection, production of angiogenic factors, and cytogenetic clonal deletion abnormalities,( 4 , 6 ) There have been no reports that
levothyroxine sodium is among the offending drugs. Traumatic lesions have also been implicated, although only in a minority of the cases.( 1
, 4 , 6 ) In the case reported here, there was a history of endotracheal intubation 16 years prior, due to the thyroid surgery, and that
might have been a contributing risk factor. Cough and hemoptysis are the most common symptoms of tracheal LCH,( 1 , 5 , 7 ) the latter
ranging from minor to massive.( 8 ) Our patient presented with a 6-month history of recurrent hemoptysis. For cutaneous LCH, various
effective treatment modalities have been reported, including excision, curettage, electrodessication, chemical cauterization, and laser
surgery. Mucosal LCH has been treated with snare cautery, excision biopsy, and plaque radiation. The preferred treatment for LCH of the
trachea or bronchus in adults has yet to be established because of the limited number of cases( 9 ); in general, it depends on the extent or
size of the lesion, age of the patient, comorbidities, and other factors contributing to the overall clinical picture.( 4 ) At early
detection, LCH is small and can be treated endoscopically with low morbidity.( 7 ) Due to the pathological characteristics of these lesions,
bleeding is a common complication during the removal process, and hemostasis is difficult to achieve. Despite this, in most of the reported
cases, flexible bronchoscopy produced favorable responses. However, if the risk of bleeding is high, the use of rigid bronchoscopy during
the removal process should be considered.( 4 ) In our patient, rigid bronchoscopy with laser photocoagulation was the procedure of choice in
order to achieve better control of the bleeding. In a previous report, hemorrhage during tracheal LCH removal was successfully treated with
laser therapy.( 10 ) The recurrence of skin and mucosal LCH after local therapy is a well-known concern. Although there is no formal
recommendation other than clinical re-evaluation, it might be necessary to use bronchoscopy during the follow-up period, because there is a
risk of local recurrence.( 1 ) During the follow-up period, our patient had no recurrence of hemoptysis. At 27 months after the treatment,
flexible bronchoscopy showed no signs of relapse. Although exceedingly rare, LCH of the trachea or bronchus should be considered as a cause
of recurrent hemoptysis, especially in patients with normal radiological findings. Tumores primários da traqueia são raros; estima-se que
sua incidência anual seja de 2,7 novos casos por milhão de habitantes.( 1 ) Esses tumores são aproximadamente 180 vezes menos comuns que os
tumores de pulmão( 2 ) e correspondem a 0,1-0,3% do total de tumores.( 2 , 3 ) Seu diagnóstico é geralmente tardio, ou porque os sintomas
são inicialmente mal interpretados ou porque os pacientes recebem o diagnóstico equivocado de asma. O hemangioma capilar lobular (HCL),
também designado granuloma piogênico, é um tumor vascular benigno que afeta mais comumente a pele ou as membranas mucosas (orais e nasais).
É extremamente raro entre todos os tumores traqueais primários, e há poucos relatos de casos na literatura.( 1 ) Apresentamos aqui o caso de
um tumor traqueal benigno raro com hemoptise recorrente, diagnosticado e tratado por meio de técnicas broncoscópicas. Uma mulher de 51 anos,
com hemoptise recorrente havia 6 meses, foi internada no hospital após um episódio significativo de hemoptise. Não apresentava nenhum outro
sintoma (isto é, sem produção de escarro, dispneia, dor torácica, perda de peso, sudorese excessiva ou febre). Apresentava história de
carcinoma papilífero da tireoide e havia sido submetida a tireoidectomia total e terapia adjuvante com iodo radioativo 16 anos atrás, sem
evidências de recidiva até então. Desde então, estava em tratamento de reposição com levotiroxina sódica. A paciente afirmou que não era
fumante e negou qualquer exposição relevante à fumaça do tabaco. O exame físico não revelou nenhuma alteração digna de nota. Exames
laboratoriais de rotina não revelaram nenhuma anormalidade. A radiografia de tórax foi normal. A TC de tórax com contraste revelou uma lesão
recém-formada na parede lateral esquerda da traqueia (Figura 1A), sem outras alterações significativas. Realizou-se broncoscopia flexível,
que confirmou a presença de uma lesão hemorrágica polipoide roxa na parede lateral esquerda do terço inferior da traqueia, sem achados
adicionais. A fim de controlar melhor a hemorragia, realizou-se broncoscopia rígida com um broncoscópio de 8,5 mm (Karl Storz Instruments,
Tuttlingen, Alemanha). A lesão foi removida em bloco com uma pinça rígida, o que resultou em hemorragia significativa, que exigiu instilação
local de soro fisiológico gelado e epinefrina (1:10.000); no entanto, não foi possível controlar a hemorragia. A hemostasia foi então
atingida por meio de fotocoagulação a laser (Multidiode Endolaser 30; INTERmedic Arfran S.A., Barcelona, Espanha; Figura 1B). Após o
procedimento, não houve nenhuma outra complicação resultante do tratamento. A histopatologia do tumor revelou HCL, sem sinais de malignidade
(Figura 2). Figura 1.Em A, TC de tórax com contraste mostrando uma pequena lesão na parede lateral esquerda da traqueia (seta vermelha). Em
B, imagens broncoscópicas confirmando a presença de uma lesão polipoide roxa na parede lateral esquerda do terço inferior da traqueia; a
remoção da lesão (com uma pinça) resultou em hemorragia significativa, que foi controlada com fotocoagulação a laser. Figura 2.O exame
histológico da lesão revelou numerosos vasos pequenos, alguns dos quais eram capilares, dispostos em um padrão lobular e separados por um
estroma fibroso, com alterações inflamatórias agudas, confirmando assim o diagnóstico de hemangioma capilar lobular. Não havia sinais de
malignidade (H&E; aumento 100×). Tumores traqueais são raros, e não há uma explicação clara para isso. Alguns autores sugerem que o fluxo
turbulento na traqueia pode proteger a mucosa, evitando o depósito de substâncias cancerígenas inaladas.( 2 ) O HCL traqueal é um tumor
vascular benigno e é extremamente raro. O HCL traqueal manifesta-se tipicamente em forma de massa hemorrágica indolor aderida a superfícies
mucosas ou cutâneas do trato respiratório superior e afeta mais comumente o lábio, o nariz, a cavidade oral e a língua.( 4 )
Histologicamente, apresenta um característico arranjo lobular de capilares em um estroma edematoso fibroblástico, e a superfície é às vezes
ulcerada.( 1 , 5 ) Embora a patogênese do HCL não esteja clara, diversos fatores têm sido implicados, tais como influência hormonal, certas
drogas, oncogenes virais, infecção por Bartonella spp., produção de fatores angiogênicos e deleções citogenéticas clonais.( 4 , 6 ) Não há
relatos de que a levotiroxina sódica esteja entre as drogas ofensivas. Lesões traumáticas também foram implicadas, embora apenas em uma
minoria dos casos.( 1 , 4 , 6 ) No caso aqui relatado, havia história de intubação endotraqueal 16 anos atrás, em virtude da cirurgia da
tireoide, e isso pode ter sido um fator de risco contribuinte. Tosse e hemoptise são os sintomas mais comuns de HCL traqueal,( 1 , 5 , 7 ) e
esta última vai de escassa a abundante. ( 8 ) Nossa paciente apresentava hemoptise recorrente havia 6 meses. Já foram relatadas diversas
formas eficazes de tratamento de HCL cutâneo, incluindo excisão, curetagem, eletrodissecção, cauterização química e cirurgia a laser. O HCL
das mucosas já foi tratado por meio de eletrocautério com laço, biópsia excisional e radioterapia com placas. Em virtude do número limitado
de casos de HCL da traqueia ou brônquio em adultos, ainda não se definiu a melhor forma de tratamento( 9 ); em geral, depende da extensão ou
tamanho da lesão, da idade do paciente, das comorbidades e de outros fatores que contribuam para o quadro clínico geral.( 4 ) Quando
detectado precocemente, o HCL é pequeno e pode ser tratado por meio de endoscopia, com baixa morbidade.( 7 ) Em virtude das características
patológicas dessas lesões, a hemorragia é uma complicação comum durante o processo de remoção, e é difícil atingir a hemostasia. Apesar
disso, na maioria dos casos relatados, a broncoscopia flexível produziu respostas favoráveis. No entanto, se o risco de hemorragia é alto, o
uso de broncoscopia rígida durante o processo de remoção deve ser considerado. ( 4 ) Em nossa paciente, a broncoscopia rígida com
fotocoagulação a laser foi o procedimento de escolha para controlar melhor a hemorragia. Em um relato anterior, a hemorragia ocorrida
durante a remoção do HCL traqueal foi tratada com sucesso por meio de terapia a laser.( 10 ) A recidiva do HCL de pele e mucosas após
terapia local é uma preocupação bem conhecida. Embora não haja nenhuma recomendação formal além de reavaliação clínica, pode ser necessário
usar broncoscopia durante o período de acompanhamento, porque há risco de recidiva local.( 1 ) Durante o período de acompanhamento, nossa
paciente não apresentou recidiva da hemoptise. A broncoscopia flexível realizada 27 meses depois do tratamento não mostrou sinais de
recidiva. Embora seja extremamente raro, o HCL da traqueia ou brônquio deve ser considerado como causa de hemoptise recorrente,
especialmente em pacientes com achados radiológicos normais.
