Cytomegalovirus is an opportunistic virus that commonly affects immunosuppressed patients. Cutaneous involvement by this virus is rare and
occurs in significantly immunocompromised hosts, with a poor prognosis. Skin ulcers may represent the first sign of systemic infection by
cytomegalovirus in these patients. Herein, a case of a systemic infection by Cytomegalovirus presenting as genital and oral ulcers in a
kidney-transplant recipient is reported. Cytomegalovirus (CMV), also known as human herpesvirus type 5, is a DNA virus that belongs to the
betaherpes subfamily of the herpesviridae family, which are characterized by their latency ability.1 It may be transmitted by saliva, urine,
sexual contact, placental transfer, breastfeeding, blood transfusion, solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell transplantations. After primary
infection, the virus goes through a long latency period in the host. In immunocompetent individuals, primary infection is oftentimes
asymptomatic, but it may manifest as a mononucleosis-like syndrome. On the other hand, in immunodepressed individuals, primary infection,
reactivation of latent infection or reinfection by a different serotype usually cause the disease.2 Herein, a case of disseminated infection
initially manifested only by worsening of renal function and the onset of skin and mucosa ulcers caused by the CMV is reported. A 68-year-
old male patient after a long time of essential hypertension progressed with hypertensive nephropathy, terminal renal failure and renal
transplantation. He was in use of prednisone, tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil since the transplantion and presented decrease of renal
function after two months requiring hospitalization. After admission, clean-based ulcers were noticed, one on the lateral border of the
tongue and another on the dorsum of the penis (Figures 1 and 2). CMV infection was suspected and the work-up included antigenemia assay in
peripheral blood and biopsies of the penile ulcer; one sample was submitted to histopathology and the other to polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) for CMV. The histopathological examination revealed ulceration, occlusion of some vessels by thrombi and prominent endothelial cells
with conspicuous cytoplasm and markedly enlarged nuclei containing CMV inclusion corpuscles, resulting in diagnosis of cytomegalovirus
infection (Figures 3, 4 and 5. The qualitative PCR for DNA of the CMV was positive in skin samples, as well as the antigenemia assay on
peripheral blood (Figure 6). The treatment with intravenous ganciclovir was started, with the dose adjusted in accordance with the renal
function, but the patient died after 41 days of admission in consequence of pulmonary sepsis. Figure 1Clean-based, well-delimited ulcer on
the lateral border of the tongue Clean-based, well-delimited ulcer on the lateral border of the tongue Figure 2Clean-based, well-delimited
ulcer on the dorsum of the penis Clean-based, well-delimited ulcer on the dorsum of the penis Figure 3Partial surface ulceration and vessels
with endothelial cells with large nuclei and ample cytoplasm, assuming an epithelioid aspect. In the lower part of the photomicrograph, a
vessel occluded by a thrombus can be seen. HE, 100X Partial surface ulceration and vessels with endothelial cells with large nuclei and
ample cytoplasm, assuming an epithelioid aspect. In the lower part of the photomicrograph, a vessel occluded by a thrombus can be seen. HE,
100X Figure 4Endothelial cells with markedly augmented nuclei, rough nucleoli and ample cytoplasm. HE, 400X Endothelial cells with markedly
augmented nuclei, rough nucleoli and ample cytoplasm. HE, 400X Figure 5Eosinophilic corpuscle of viral inclusion, surrounded by a light halo
in the cytoplasm of an endothelial cell with an epithelioid aspect. HE, 400X Eosinophilic corpuscle of viral inclusion, surrounded by a
light halo in the cytoplasm of an endothelial cell with an epithelioid aspect. HE, 400X Figure 6Agarose gel image after electrophoresis,
with positive PCR results for DNA of CMV in the penile ulcer. M: Marker of molecular weight. C -: Negative control. C +: Positive control.
A: Sample of the penile ulcer with a band at the level compared to positive control, which confirms the presence of DNA of the CMV in this
sample Agarose gel image after electrophoresis, with positive PCR results for DNA of CMV in the penile ulcer. M: Marker of molecular weight.
C -: Negative control. C +: Positive control. A: Sample of the penile ulcer with a band at the level compared to positive control, which
confirms the presence of DNA of the CMV in this sample Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is an opportunistic virus that frequently affects
immunosuppressed patients, such as those with HIV infection/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and kidney transplant recipients.3,4 Active
disease by CMV occurs most of the times in the first hundred days after transplant, at the moment of greater immunosuppression, representing
an important morbimortality factor.24 It may manifest as a syndrome characterized by fever, atypical lymphocytosis, neutropenia or
thrombocytopenia and malaise or as an invasive tissue disease.2,5 Although visceral manifestations by CMV are frequently reported, skin
lesions caused by this virus are rare.3,5 In the present case, the patient in day 60 presented worsening of the renal function and ulcers of
oral mucosa and skin of the penis. The most frequent infectious dermatoses in renal transplant recipients are caused by fungi, followed by
virus and bacteria; among the viral infections, there is a marked predominance of herpesvirus infection in the first year after
transplantation, while warts usually appear later.6,7 It seems that the dermis is relatively inhospitable for the CMV and that the rare
cutaneous involvement occurs only in significantly immunodepressed patients. Consequently, cutaneous lesions are usually associated with
disseminated disease and predict a poor prognosis.3,4,5 CMV infection usually presents at the skin as a generalized maculopapulous eruption,
but ulcers, nodules, vesicles, petechiae and plaques may come into being, mimicking other dermatoses, especially other infections.
Ulcerations involving mainly the genital, perineal and perianal areas, as well as necrosis of mucosal membranes, may occur in more severe
cases.4,8 Contrasting with what happens in lesions caused by herpes simplex or varicella-zoster, in which the cytopathic alterations
(karyomegaly, peripheral chromatin margination and multinucleation) take place preferably in the epidermis and in the epithelium of hair
follicles, the cellular alterations characteristic of infection by CMV involve preferentially the endothelial cells that line the small
capillary vessels in the dermis.9 These present large nuclei and ample cytoplasm, assuming an epithelioid aspect, and exhibit a rough
eosinophilic inclusion corpuscle surrounded by a light halo, which may be present in the nucleus of the cell or located in the cytoplasm.
Neutrophilic invasion of vessel walls is often observed, although unequivocal leukocytoclastic vasculitis is rare. Less frequently, the
cytopathic alterations characteristic of CMV infection may be found in fibroblasts and macrophages, as well as in the epithelium of eccrine
ducts and hair follicles. In congenital infections, extramedullar hematopoiesis may be found in the skin.8,9,10 There are two possible
explanations for oral-genital ulcers caused by the CMV: the latent virus in the gastrointestinal tract, when reactivated, infects the skin
of the perineum via fecal elimination, or reactivation of the latent virus in endothelial cells during the course of hematogenic
dissemination.4 Infection by CMV also produces a vast range of indirect effects, such as decrease in function of the transplanted kidney,
susceptibility to rejection and opportunistic infections.2 In the present report, the patient developed symptoms of pulmonary sepsis despite
the use of intravenous ganciclovir. Because it was not possible to exclude a associated bacterial infection, systemic antibiotic therapy was
promptly started. Nevertheless, the patient died after 41 days of admission in the hospital. The infection is diagnosed based on the
presence of typical clinical signs and symptoms and identification of characteristic inclusion corpuscles in histopathology, combined with
detection of CMV in the blood and/or involved organs.3,4 At present, the methods of choice for such detection are antigenemia or PCR.1-4
Antigenemia is a fast assay of semiquantitative immunofluorescence that detects phosphoprotein 65 produced by polymorphonuclear cells
infected by CMV in peripheral blood. PCR detects viral DNA in total blood, leukocytes, plasma, serum or in the affected organ.2 In this
case, we diagnosed the infection through histopathologic examination, antigenemia in peripheral blood and qualitative PCR in the affected
skin. The infection should be treated with intravenous valganciclovir or ganciclovir until the replication of CMV is no longer detected,
with a minimum of two weeks of treatment. Viral load monitoring should be done on a weekly basis, by means of PCR or antigenemia in
peripheral blood.2 The dermatologist is of fundamental importance in a hospital where there is a renal transplant service. This case is an
example of our role in the diagnosis and early treatment of severe diseases in the transplanted patient. Conflict of Interest: None.
Financial Support: None. Study carried out at the Hospital Federal de Bonsucesso (HFB) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
