Angiosarcoma is a rare malignant vascular tumor. Pulmonary involvement is usually attributable to metastasis from other primary sites,
primary pulmonary angiosarcoma therefore being quite uncommon. We report a case of angiosarcoma with pulmonary involvement, probably primary
to the lung, which had gone untreated for more than two years. We describe this rare neoplasm and its growth, as well as the extensive local
invasion and hematogenous metastasis at presentation. We also discuss its poor prognosis. Angiosarcoma is a malignant endothelial cell tumor
of vascular or lymphatic origin and accounts for approximately 2% of all soft tissue sarcomas.( 1 ) The most common primary sites are the
skin and the subcutaneous tissue of the head and neck.( 2 ) Pulmonary involvement is almost always metastatic.( 3 ) Primary pulmonary
angiosarcoma is extremely rare, only a few cases having been reported. A 78-year-old female nonsmoker had previously been examined, a CT
scan of the chest having shown a left upper lobe pulmonary mass (Figure 1A). At that time, she underwent bronchoscopy with BAL and bronchial
biopsy. The BAL fluid and the biopsy sample were both negative for neoplastic tissue. She subsequently dropped out of follow-up. Two years
later, she was referred to our hospital with a six-month history of shortness of breath, dry cough, and weight loss. A chest X-ray and a
chest CT scan (without contrast) identified a 10 × 7 cm lesion in the left upper lobe without forming cleavage plans with the aorta and the
pulmonary artery (Figures 1B and 1C), with a small left pleural effusion and small mediastinal lymph nodes. An 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose
positron emission tomography-CT (FDG PET-CT) scan (Figure 1D) showed increased metabolic activity in many organs, greatest in the mass in
the upper left lobe, the maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of which was 22. Metabolic activity was also increased in the
mediastinal lymph nodes (SUVmax = 7), as well as in the right and left suprarenal glands (SUVmax = 16 for both); the aortic lumbar lymph
nodes (SUVmax = 11); and the right inguinal lymph node (SUVmax = 10). In addition, there was a mesenteric focus, together with subcutaneous
tissue nodes and multiple locations in bone. Figure 1.Evolution of angiosarcoma in a 78-year-old female nonsmoker: in A, initial CT scan of
the chest showing a left upper lobe pulmonary mass; in B and C, CT scans of the chest, obtained two years later, showing a 10 × 7 cm lesion
in the left upper lobe, with a small left pleural effusion and small mediastinal lymph nodes; in D, an 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography-CT scan showing increased metabolic activity in many organs, greatest in the mass in the upper left lobe. The
bronchoscopic examination revealed a mass occluding the left upper lobe bronchus (Figure 2), and a bronchoscopic biopsy was performed.
Before the results of the tissue sample examination had been obtained, she developed right hemiparesis and a new subcutaneous nodule arose.
A CT scan showed multiple brain lesions. She was started on corticosteroids. However, she showed no clinical improvement and brain
radiotherapy was proposed. Figure 2.Photograph of a mass occluding the left upper lobe bronchus. The histological examination of the biopsy
specimen showed a soft-tissue neoplasm with a sheet-like or enclosing cleft arrangement of spindle and epithelioid cells with prominent
nucleoli, with some multinucleation; mitotic figures were conspicuous, as were extensive necrosis and hemorrhage (Figure 3A).
Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor specimen revealed that it was strongly positive for CD31 (Figure 3B), factor VIII-related antigen
(Figure 3C), and vimentin; weakly positive for the nuclear transcription factor Fli-1 and cytokeratin AE1/AE3; and negative for CD34,
desmin, and smooth muscle actin. Therefore, the histology and immunohistochemistry were both consistent with epithelioid angiosarcoma.
Figure 3.Histological examination of the biopsy specimen: in A, extensive necrosis and hemorrhage; in B, immunohistochemical staining for
CD31; in C, immunohistochemical staining for factor VIII-related antigen. Two weeks after the histologic diagnosis had been made, the
patient died. Her death was attributed to the progression of the disease, the brain metastases in particular. Angiosarcoma in the lung
usually represents metastasis from another primary site. Nevertheless, we believe that the case presented here was one of primary pulmonary
angiosarcoma. The patient had a two-year evolution of a pulmonary mass that had gone unmonitored and untreated for more than two years. It
seems apparent that the previous lesion corresponded to the pulmonary angiosarcoma that evolved and disseminated during that time. This case
report also documents the behavior of a primary pulmonary angiosarcoma, which is characterized by insidious growth with extensive local
invasion and hematogenous metastasis.( 4 ) Early diagnosis of pulmonary angiosarcoma is not common, because of its rarity and the low index
of suspicion. According to data in the literature, the average age of pulmonary angiosarcoma patients is 55.9 years (range, 23.0-82.0 years)
and males are more often affected than are female.( 5 ) Patients usually present nonspecific respiratory symptoms that include hemoptysis,
cough, dyspnea, chest pain, and weight loss. On CT scans, primary angiosarcoma can be multifocal or can manifest as solitary lesions. ( 4 ,
6 , 7 ) Imaging with PET can be useful in the diagnosis, staging,( 8 ) and follow-up of patients with angiosarcoma. ( 9 ) In the case
presented here, the FDG PET-CT scan confirmed its usefulness in identifying the regions and systems involved. Biopsy and immunohistochemical
analysis are essential for the diagnosis of angiosarcoma. The histological features can vary within and among cases. Abnormal, pleomorphic,
malignant endothelial cells constitute the hallmark of angiosarcoma. Those cells can be rounded, polygonal, or fusiform, with or without an
epithelioid appearance. In well-differentiated areas, abnormal endothelial cells form functioning vascular sinusoidal channels that are
continuous with normal vascular channels. In patients with progressively more aggressive disease, the architecture becomes more chaotic,
with less clearly defined vascular spaces. In poorly differentiated areas, the malignant endothelial cells form continuous monolayers,
usually with an epithelioid morphology. An angiosarcoma typically expresses endothelial markers including factor VIII-related antigen, CD34,
CD31, and Fli-1. Among those markers, factor VIII-related antigen is the most specific but the least sensitive. Positivity for CD31 is
relatively specific and extremely sensitive, being detected in approximately 90% of the cases. In approximately 30% of the cases,
angiosarcoma expresses cytokeratin.( 10 ) Due to the rarity of angiosarcoma, no standardized therapy regimen has been established,
especially for primary pulmonary angiosarcoma. Patients with pulmonary angiosarcoma have been treated with radiotherapy,( 9 , 11 ) surgical
resection,( 4 , 9 ) immunotherapy,(4,6,11) chemotherapy,( 4 , 6 , 9 ) or a combination of those.( 4 , 6 , 9 , 11 ) Although none of those
treatments have been shown to be effective, there have been reports of effective treatments for the condition,( 4 , 9 , 11 ) especially in
cases of localized disease. It has been proposed that the most effective treatment is surgery, which should be considered as early as
possible for resectable tumors.( 5 ) However, neoplasms are often inoperable at the time of diagnosis. Multimodality therapy, such as the
combination of radiotherapy and immunotherapy (recombinant interleukin-2)( 11 ) and that of surgery and chemotherapy,( 4 ) has also proven
to be effective. Chemotherapy with gemcitabine and docetaxel has been reported to produce a complete radiographic response.( 9 ) The
prognosis of pulmonary angiosarcoma is poor, mortality within the first few months after clinical presentation, as occurred in the case
presented here, approaching 100%.( 4 - 7 ) Angiosarcoma is a rare malignant neoplasm, and only a few dozen cases of primary pulmonary
angiosarcoma have been reported in the literature. It is a diagnostic challenge for clinicians and pathologists. A high index of suspicion
is essential to its early diagnosis and could improve its poor prognosis. Study carried out in the Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, EPE,
Lisboa, Portugal. Financial support: None. O angiosarcoma é um tumor vascular maligno. O envolvimento pulmonar é geralmente atribuído à
metástase de outros sítios primários, sendo o angiossarcoma pulmonar primário extremamente raro. Relatamos um caso de angiossarcoma com
envolvimento pulmonar, provavelmente primário no pulmão com mais de dois anos de evolução. Descrevemos seu crescimento e sua extensa invasão
local e hematogênica na apresentação. Documentamos ainda seu mau prognóstico. O angiossarcoma é um tumor maligno com origem nas células
endoteliais vasculares ou linfáticas e representa aproximadamente 2% de todos os sarcomas de partes moles.( 1 ) Os locais primários mais
comuns são a pele e o tecido subcutâneo da cabeça e pescoço,( 2 ) sendo o comprometimento pulmonar quase sempre metastático. ( 3 ) O
angiossarcoma pulmonar primário é extremamente raro, havendo poucos casos relatados. Mulher de 78 anos, não tabagista, anteriormente
avaliada por apresentar TC de tórax com massa pulmonar no lobo superior esquerdo (Figura 1A). Na época, foi submetida a broncoscopia com LBA
e biópsias brônquicas, os quais foram negativos para tecido neoplásico. Posteriormente, abandonou o seguimento. Dois anos depois, foi
encaminhada ao nosso hospital por dispneia, tosse seca e perda de peso com seis meses de evolução. A radiografia e a TC de tórax (sem
contraste) evidenciaram lesão de 10 × 7 cm em lobo superior esquerdo, sem plano de clivagem com a aorta e a artéria pulmonar (Figuras 1B e
1C), com pequeno derrame pleural à esquerda e pequenos linfonodos mediastinais. A tomografia por emissão de pósitrons com 18F
fluordesoxiglicose combinada à TC (FDG PET-CT, do inglês 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-CT, Figura 1D) mostrou aumento
de atividade metabólica em vários órgãos, nomeadamente na massa do lobo superior esquerdo que apresentava o valor padronizado de captação
(SUV, do inglês standardized uptake value) máximo (SUVmáx) de 22. Outros sítios envolvidos foram os linfonodos mediastinais (SUVmáx = 7), as
glândulas adrenais direita e esquerda (SUVmáx = 16), os linfonodos aórticos lombares (SUVmáx = 11) e o linfonodo inguinal direito (SUVmáx =
10). Documentou-se ainda, um foco mesentérico, nódulos no tecido subcutâneo e extensa metastatização óssea. Figura 1.Evolução do
angiossarcoma em mulher de 78 anos, não tabagista: em A, TC de tórax inicial mostrando massa pulmonar em lobo superior esquerdo; em B e C,
TCs de tórax, obtidas dois anos depois, mostrando lesão de 10 × 7 cm em lobo superior esquerdo, com pequeno derrame pleural à esquerda e
pequenos linfonodos mediastinais; em D, tomografia por emissão de pósitrons com 18F fluordesoxiglicose combinada à TC mostrando aumento de
atividade metabólica em muitos órgãos, maior na massa no lobo superior esquerdo. O exame broncoscópico revelou massa ocluindo o brônquio
lobar superior esquerdo (Figura 2), e foram realizadas biópsias por broncoscopia. Antes da obtenção dos resultados do exame da amostra de
tecido, a paciente desenvolveu hemiparesia à direita e houve aparecimento de novo nódulo subcutâneo cervical. A TC de crânio mostrou
múltiplas lesões cerebrais, e a paciente iniciou tratamento com corticosteroides. Porém, não houve melhora clínica, e foi proposta
radioterapia cerebral. Figura 2.Fotografia de uma massa ocluindo o brônquio lobar superior esquerdo. O exame histológico da biópsia mostrou
neoplasia de partes moles com arranjo laminar, ou em forma de fenda circundante, formada por células fusiformes e epitelioides com nucléolos
proeminentes, com alguma multinucleação; eram evidentes figuras mitóticas, extensa necrose e hemorragia (Figura 3A). A coloração imuno-
histoquímica do fragmento tumoral revelou que esse era fortemente positivo para CD31 (Figura 3B), antígeno relacionado ao fator VIII (Figura
3C) e vimentina; fracamente positivo para fator de transcrição nuclear Fli-1 e citoqueratinas AE1/AE3; e negativo para CD34, desmina e
actina de músculo liso. Portanto, a histologia e a imuno-histoquímica foram compatíveis com angiossarcoma epitelioide. Figura 3.Exame
histológico da biópsia: em A, extensa necrose e hemorragia; em B, coloração imuno-histoquímica para CD31; em C, coloração imuno-histoquímica
para o antígeno relacionado ao fator VIII. Duas semanas após o diagnóstico histológico, a paciente morreu. Sua morte foi atribuída à
progressão da doença, em particular às metástases cerebrais. O angiossarcoma no pulmão geralmente representa metástase de outro sítio
primário. Contudo, acreditamos que o caso aqui descrito foi de angiossarcoma pulmonar primário. A paciente apresentava massa pulmonar, com
mais de dois anos de evolução, que não havia sido monitorada nem tratada. Parece-nos evidente que a lesão anterior correspondia ao
angiossarcoma pulmonar que evoluiu e se disseminou durante esse período. Este relato de caso também documenta o comportamento do
angiossarcoma pulmonar primário, que se caracteriza por um crescimento insidioso com extensa invasão local e metástase hematogênica.(4) O
seu diagnóstico precoce não é frequente, tendo em conta a sua raridade e o baixo índice de suspeição. De acordo com dados da literatura, a
média de idade dos pacientes com angiossarcoma pulmonar é de 55,9 anos (variação, 23,0-82,0 anos) e o sexo masculino é mais acometido do que
o feminino.( 5 ) Os pacientes geralmente apresentam sintomas respiratórios inespecíficos que incluem hemoptise, tosse, dispneia, dor
torácica e perda de peso. Na TC, o angiossarcoma primário pode ser multifocal ou se manifestar como lesões solitárias. ( 4 , 6 , 7 ) A PET
pode ser útil no diagnóstico, estadiamento( 8 ) e seguimento de pacientes com angiossarcoma.( 9 ) No caso aqui descrito, a FDG PET-CT
confirmou sua utilidade na identificação do envolvimento sistêmico. A biópsia e a análise imuno-histoquímica são essenciais para o
diagnóstico de angiossarcoma. As características histológicas podem variar dentro e entre os casos. Células endoteliais pleomórficas
anormais e malignas constituem a principal característica do angiossarcoma. Essas células podem ser arredondadas, poligonais ou fusiformes,
com ou sem aparência epitelioide. Em áreas bem diferenciadas, as células endoteliais anormais formam canais vasculares sinusoides funcionais
em continuidade com canais vasculares normais. Em pacientes com doença progressivamente mais agressiva, a arquitetura torna-se mais caótica,
com espaços vasculares menos claramente definidos. Em áreas pouco diferenciadas, as células endoteliais malignas formam monocamadas
contínuas, geralmente com morfologia epitelioide. O angiossarcoma tipicamente expressa marcadores endoteliais que incluem antígeno
relacionado ao fator VIII, CD34, CD31 e Fli-1. Entre esses marcadores, o antígeno relacionado ao fator VIII é o mais específico, mas o menos
sensível. A positividade para CD31 é relativamente específica e extremamente sensível, sendo detectada em aproximadamente 90% dos casos. Em
aproximadamente 30% dos casos, o angiossarcoma expressa citoqueratina.( 10 ) Tendo em consideração a raridade do angiossarcoma, não há um
esquema terapêutico padrão estabelecido, especialmente para o angiossarcoma pulmonar primário. De acordo com os relatos de caso descritos,
os doentes com angiossarcoma pulmonar têm sido tratados com radioterapia,( 9 , 11 ) ressecção cirúrgica,( 4 , 9 ) imunoterapia,( 4 , 6 , 11
) quimioterapia,( 4 , 6 , 9 ) ou uma combinação dessas modalidades.( 4 , 6 , 9 , 11 ) Embora nenhuma dessas abordagens se tenha mostrado
eficaz de forma consistente, há descrições de resposta com algumas dessas opções terapêuticas,( 4 , 9 , 11 ) especialmente em casos de
doença localizada. A cirurgia tem sido proposta como o tratamento mais eficaz, devendo ser considerada o mais cedo possível no caso de
tumores ressecáveis.( 5 ) Contudo, a sua intervenção encontra-se limitada, tendo em conta que a maioria dos casos são inoperáveis na data do
diagnóstico. A terapia multimodal, tal como a combinação de radioterapia e imunoterapia (interleucina-2 recombinante)( 11 ) e a de cirurgia
e quimioterapia,( 4 ) tem se mostrado eficaz. Há relatos de que a quimioterapia com gemcitabina e docetaxel produz uma resposta radiográfica
completa.( 9 ) O prognóstico do angiossarcoma pulmonar é mau, sendo a mortalidade nos primeiros meses após a apresentação clínica, como no
caso aqui descrito, de aproximadamente 100%.( 4 - 7 ) Em conclusão, o angiossarcoma é uma neoplasia maligna rara, havendo apenas algumas
dezenas de casos de angiossarcoma pulmonar primário relatados na literatura. Apesar de representar um desafio diagnóstico para clínicos e
anatomopatologistas, é essencial um elevado índice de suspeição para o seu diagnóstico precoce e, possivelmente, melhor prognóstico.
Trabalho realizado no Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, EPE, Lisboa, Portugal. Apoio financeiro: Nenhum.
