A previously healthy 41-year-old male farmer presented with a seven-month history of progressive dyspnea requiring home oxygen
supplementation. He was a smoker (with a smoking history of 45 pack-years). Physical examination revealed mild respiratory distress,
bilateral crackles at the lung bases, and an SpO2 of 81% on room air. The patient had no anemia, and his leukocyte count was normal, as were
other laboratory test results. An HRCT scan showed extensive areas of ground-glass attenuation, as well as interlobular and intralobular
septal thickening, together with areas of consolidation, particularly in the basal and posterior segments (Figure 1). Figure 1.Axial CT scan
showing extensive areas of ground-glass attenuation and diffuse interlobular septal thickening in both lungs in a patient with pulmonary
alveolar proteinosis. The aforementioned HRCT findings constitute the crazy-paving pattern, which is characterized by diffuse ground-glass
opacities in the lung parenchyma, together with interlobular and intralobular septal thickening. The crazy-paving pattern is primarily seen
in acute and chronic diseases. A specific etiologic diagnosis is generally made by analyzing the temporal evolution of the condition and the
clinical and radiological findings. A crazy-paving pattern associated with chronic progression is primarily due to interstitial pneumonia,
which is usually associated with reticular opacities, traction bronchiectasis/bronchiolectasis, and architectural distortion, with or
without honeycombing; adenocarcinoma with a lepidic growth pattern, which exhibits slowly progressive growth and is usually accompanied by
weight loss, anorexia, and mild cough, being asymptomatic in some cases; lipoid pneumonia, which is often associated with disorders that
facilitate chronic aspiration, including esophageal motility disorders and swallowing disorders associated with the use of mineral oil, CT
scans showing a crazy-paving pattern predominantly in the posterior and lower lung segments, together with consolidation and fat
attenuation; and alveolar proteinosis, which is a rare disease that is characterized by impaired surfactant clearance, resulting in alveolar
filling with protein- and lipid-rich material and eliciting an interstitial inflammatory response, which is strongly associated with smoking
and, on CT scans, appears as a diffuse but predominantly central crazy-paving pattern associated with chronic progression and, in some
cases, well-defined lobular areas of normal lung parenchyma. In the case reported here (a previously healthy patient with a significant
smoking history and a crazy-paving pattern associated with chronic progression), initial working diagnoses included neoplasm and alveolar
proteinosis, the latter being confirmed by lung biopsy. Homem de 41 anos, agricultor, tabagista (45 maços-ano), apresentando dispneia
progressiva há cerca de sete meses, com necessidade de suplementação de oxigênio domiciliar. Previamente hígido. Ao exame físico apresentava
leve desconforto respiratório, com estertores crepitantes bilaterais nas bases pulmonares e SpO2 de 81% em ar ambiente. Não apresentava
anemia ou alteração no leucograma, e os demais exames laboratoriais estavam normais. A TCAR mostrou extensas opacidades com atenuação em
vidro fosco associadas com espessamento de septos inter e intralobulares, assim como algumas áreas com predomínio de consolidações,
principalmente nos segmentos basais e posteriores (Figura 1). Figura 1.TC axial com extensas áreas de atenuação em vidro fosco e
espessamento de septos interlobulares difusos em ambos os pulmões, em um paciente com proteinose alveolar pulmonar. Esse paciente apresenta
um achado de imagem descrito na TCAR como padrão de pavimentação em mosaico, que é caracterizado por opacidades em vidro fosco difusas no
parênquima pulmonar, associadas a espessamento de septos inter e intralobulares. As principais doenças que cursam com esse padrão podem ser
divididas em agudas e crônicas; associando-se à evolução temporal os dados clínicos e radiológicos, geralmente se consegue chegar a um
diagnóstico etiológico específico. As causas de padrão de pavimentação em mosaico com evolução crônica na TC são principalmente as
pneumonias intersticiais, que costumam estar associadas a opacidades reticulares, brônquio/bronquiolectasias de tração e distorção
arquitetural, com ou sem faveolamento; o adenocarcinoma de crescimento lepídico, que tem crescimento lentamente progressivo e costuma se
apresentar com perda ponderal, anorexia, tosse branda, sendo por vezes até assintomático; a pneumonia lipoídica, muitas vezes associada a
distúrbios facilitadores de aspiração crônica, como distúrbios da motilidade do trato gastroesofágico ou da deglutição associados ao uso de
óleo mineral, podendo-se identificar à TC a pavimentação em mosaico, predominando em segmentos posteriores e inferiores dos pulmões, e
consolidações com atenuação de gordura; e a proteinose alveolar, que é uma doença rara caracterizada por uma desregulação na depuração do
surfactante pulmonar, resultando em um preenchimento alveolar por material rico em proteínas e lipídios associado a uma resposta
inflamatória intersticial, que está fortemente associada ao tabagismo e que tomograficamente se apresenta como pavimentação em mosaico de
evolução crônica e distribuição difusa, porém com predomínio central e, por vezes, com áreas lobulares e bem delimitadas de preservação do
parênquima pulmonar. No caso desse paciente previamente hígido, com história de tabagismo importante e um padrão de pavimentação em mosaico
de evolução crônica na TC, foram considerados inicialmente os diagnósticos de neoplasia e proteinose alveolar como principais hipóteses,
sendo realizada biópsia pulmonar que confirmou o diagnóstico de proteinose alveolar.
