Usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) can be accompanied by various clinical conditions, probably the most important of which is idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), although the exact incidence and prevalence of IPF, in Brazil or elsewhere, remains unknown.( 1 - 3 ) The
diagnosis of IPF can be established only after the exclusion of other diseases potentially associated with the UIP pattern, such as chronic
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, connective tissue diseases, especially rheumatoid arthritis, drug toxicity, and asbestosis.( 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 )
The association between antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-positive vasculitis and interstitial lung disease (ILD) has recently been
described, including another possible etiology for the UIP pattern. Here, we report the case of a patient with an initial diagnosis of IPF
who later developed ANCA-positive vasculitis. A 62-year-old nonsmoking male patient, a bricklayer, presented with a one-year history of dry
cough and slowly progressive dyspnea, classified as grade 2 on the modified Medical Research Council scale. He was being treated with
omeprazole, bromopride, and simvastatin for gastroesophageal reflux disease and dyslipidemia. Pulmonary auscultation revealed crackles at
both lung bases, and the SpO2 was 97% on room air. The findings of an HRCT scan of the chest (Figure 1) were consistent with a UIP pattern.
Pulmonary function tests revealed a mild restrictive pattern (FVC, 78% of predicted/3.6 L; FEV1, 81% of predicted/2.8 L; FEV1/FVC ratio,
0.78; and total lung capacity, 75% of predicted/5.25 L) with normal DLCO (92% of predicted/27.6 mL/min/mmHg). During a six-minute walk test,
there was no desaturation (minimum SpO2, 96%), and the six-minute walk distance was 548 m. Figure 1.Chest HRCT scans showing findings
consistent with the pattern of usual interstitial pneumonia: A) discrete subpleural reticular opacities in the upper lobes; B) subpleural
reticular opacities and discrete areas of ground-glass abnormalities at the level of the carina; C) peripheral reticular opacities, traction
bronchiolectasis, and discrete areas of ground-glass abnormalities predominantly in the lower lobes; and D) peripheral honeycombing and
traction bronchiolectasis in the lower lobes. The results of laboratory tests were normal, and autoantibody tests were negative, including
tests for rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, anti-Jo-1, anti-Scl-70, and ANCA. The findings of a transthoracic echocardiogram were
also normal. A surgical lung biopsy performed at another institution was reviewed and was found to show the UIP histopathological pattern,
confirming the diagnosis of IPF. At that time, the patient was still under treatment for gastroesophageal reflux disease. After one year of
clinical stability, the patient was admitted to the hospital with a one-month history of daily fever (38°C) and hematuria, together with
swelling and purple lesions in the lower limbs. Laboratory tests revealed anemia (hemoglobin, 9.5 g/dL), elevated C-reactive protein (155
mg/L; reference range, < 5 mg/L) and elevated creatinine (4.5 mg/dL; estimated creatinine clearance, 14 mL/min). Urinalysis showed
hematuria, proteinuria, and leukocyturia. There were also a mild reduction in complement C3 (86 mg/dL; reference range, 90-180 mg/dL) and C4
(9.6 mg/dL, reference range, 10-40 mg/dL), as well as positivity for myeloperoxidase-ANCA (1/320), antinuclear antibodies (1/320, with fine-
speckled nuclear staining pattern), and rheumatoid factor (97 IU/mL). A new kidney biopsy was performed, and the analysis of the biopsy
sample confirmed the diagnosis of pauci-immune crescentic glomerulonephritis associated with microscopic polyangiitis (MPA), and a skin
biopsy of the lower limbs showed leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Methylprednisolone pulse therapy was administered at 1 g/day for three days,
after which the patient was started on prednisone at a dose of 1 mg/day that was gradually tapered thereafter. Subsequent treatment with
mycophenolate (1.5 g/day) produced gradual clinical improvement. After two years of treatment, the patient continued to have mild dyspnea
(modified Medical Research Council scale grade 1), to show normal kidney function, and to test negative for ANCA, and well as to have stable
HRCT and pulmonary function test findings. In patients with ANCA-positive vasculitis, particularly MPA, ILD is an uncommon finding and
usually affects older men, with myeloperoxidase-ANCA and a UIP pattern on histopathology. However, the pathophysiology of the association of
ILD and ANCA-positive vasculitis has not been fully elucidated.( 6 ) Recent studies have demonstrated that there is a subset of IPF patients
who are ANCA-positive at diagnosis or who convert to ANCA positivity during follow-up and subsequently develop MPA.( 6 , 7 ) Kagiyama et
al.( 7 ) evaluated ANCA positivity and the incidence of MPA in 504 patients with IPF. The authors found that 36 (7%) of the patients were
ANCA-positive at diagnosis of IPF. Of the 264 patients who were subsequently tested, 29 (11%) converted to ANCA positivity during the first
five years of follow-up. Of the 35 patients who were either ANCA-positive at diagnosis or subsequently converted to ANCA positivity, 9 were
diagnosed with MPA. Two drugs, nintedanib and pirfenidone, both of which slow the decline in lung function, were recently approved for the
treatment of IPF.( 8 , 9 ) However, to date, there is no recommendation regarding the use of those drugs in patients with ILD associated
with ANCA-positive vasculitis, in whom it has been suggested that the use of corticosteroids plus cyclophosphamide or rituximab is a better
approach.( 6 ) The combination of mycophenolate and corticosteroids can also be considered. The prognosis of patients with ILD associated
with ANCA-positive vasculitis has not been fully established. In a study of 49 such patients (82% with MPA), mortality was 34% in the first
60 months after the diagnosis. In a review of 65 patients (85% with a UIP pattern) that were followed for 45 months, 35% showed progression
of ILD and the remaining 65% showed stability or improvement,( 6 ) which suggests that the prognosis of ILD associated with ANCA-positive
vasculitis is better than is that of IPF.( 6 ) In conclusion, this report underscores the potential for the occurrence of ILD, including a
UIP pattern, in patients with ANCA-positive vasculitis. In that form of vasculitis, interstitial lung involvement can precede systemic
manifestations and patients can be initially diagnosed with IPF. We emphasize the importance of an extensive etiological investigation of
patients who show a UIP pattern, especially of those in whom the disease has an indolent course. The diagnosis of a secondary cause could
facilitate the definition of the best therapeutic strategy and the determination of the prognosis in such patients. A pneumonia intersticial
usual (PIU) pode ser acompanhada de diversas condições clínicas, das quais a mais importante provavelmente seja a fibrose pulmonar
idiopática (FPI), embora a exata incidência e prevalência de FPI, no Brasil ou em outras localidades, permaneça desconhecida.( 1 - 3 ) O
diagnóstico de FPI pode ser estabelecido apenas após a exclusão de outras doenças potencialmente associadas ao padrão de PIU, tais como
pneumonite de hipersensibilidade crônica, doenças do tecido conjuntivo, especialmente artrite reumatoide, toxicidade por drogas e
asbestose.( 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 ) A associação entre vasculite antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA, anticorpo anticitoplasma de neutrófilos)
positiva e doença pulmonar intersticial (DPI) foi descrita recentemente, incluindo outra possível etiologia para o padrão de PIU. Relatamos
aqui o caso de um paciente com diagnóstico inicial de FPI que posteriormente desenvolveu vasculite ANCA positiva. Paciente de 62 anos, do
sexo masculino, não fumante, pedreiro, apresentava história de tosse seca e dispneia lentamente progressiva, classificada como grau 2 na
escala modificada do Medical Research Council, há um ano. Estava em uso de omeprazol, bromoprida e sinvastatina para tratamento de doença do
refluxo gastroesofágico e dislipidemia. A ausculta pulmonar revelou estertores crepitantes bibasais, e a SpO2 era de 97% em ar ambiente. Os
achados de TCAR de tórax (Figura 1) eram compatíveis com o padrão de PIU. Os testes de função pulmonar revelaram padrão restritivo leve
(CVF, 78% do previsto/3,6 l; VEF1, 81% do previsto/2,8 l; relação VEF1/CVF, 0,78; e capacidade pulmonar total, 75% do previsto/5,25 l) com
DLCO normal (92% do previsto/27,6 ml/min/mmHg). Durante o teste de caminhada de seis minutos, não houve dessaturação (SpO2 mínima, 96%), e a
distância percorrida foi de 548 m. Figura 1.Imagens de TCAR de tórax mostrando achados compatíveis com o padrão de pneumonia intersticial
usual: A) discretas opacidades reticulares subpleurais nos lobos superiores; B) opacidades reticulares subpleurais e discretas áreas de
anormalidade em vidro fosco no nível da carina; C) opacidades reticulares periféricas, bronquiolectasias de tração e discretas áreas de
anormalidade em vidro fosco predominantemente nos lobos inferiores; e D) faveolamento periférico e bronquiolectasias de tração nos lobos
inferiores. Os resultados dos exames laboratoriais foram normais, e os testes de autoanticorpos foram negativos, inclusive os testes para
fator reumatoide, anticorpos antinucleares, anti-Jo-1, anti-Scl-70 e ANCA. Os achados do ecocardiograma transtorácico também foram normais.
A revisão da biópsia pulmonar cirúrgica realizada em outra instituição demonstrou padrão histopatológico de PIU, confirmando o diagnóstico
de FPI. Na época, o paciente ainda estava em tratamento para doença do refluxo gastroesofágico. Após um ano de estabilidade clínica, o
paciente foi internado com história de febre diária (38°C) e hematúria há um mês, juntamente com inchaço e lesões arroxeadas nos membros
inferiores. Os exames laboratoriais revelaram anemia (hemoglobina, 9,5 g/dl), proteína C reativa elevada (155 mg/l; intervalo de referência,
< 5 mg/l) e creatinina elevada (4,5 mg/dl; clearance estimado de creatinina, 14 ml/min). O exame de urina tipo 1 mostrou hematúria,
proteinúria e leucocitúria. Também houve uma leve diminuição de C3 (86 mg/dl; intervalo de referência, 90-180 mg/dl) e C4 (9,6 mg/dl,
intervalo de referência, 10-40 mg/dl), assim como positividade de ANCA antimieloperoxidase (1/320), anticorpos antinucleares (1/320, com
padrão de coloração nuclear pontilhada fina) e fator reumatoide (97 UI/ml). Realizou-se nova biópsia renal, sendo que a análise da amostra
da biópsia confirmou o diagnóstico de glomerulonefrite crescêntica pauci-imune associada a poliangiite microscópica (PAM), e a biópsia de
tecido de membros inferiores demonstrou vasculite leucocitoclástica. Foi administrada pulsoterapia com metilprednisolona 1 g/dia por três
dias e, em seguida, foi iniciado tratamento com prednisona na dose de 1 mg/dia, a qual foi gradualmente reduzida. O tratamento posterior com
micofenolato (1,5 g/dia) produziu melhora clínica gradual. Após dois anos de tratamento, o paciente continuava apresentando dispneia leve
(grau 1 na escala modificada do Medical Research Council), função renal normal e negatividade de ANCA, assim como achados de TCAR e
resultados de testes de função pulmonar estáveis. Em pacientes com vasculite ANCA positiva, particularmente PAM, a DPI é um achado incomum e
geralmente afeta homens mais velhos, com ANCA antimieloperoxidase e padrão de PIU na histopatologia. Porém, a fisiopatologia da associação
de DPI e vasculite ANCA positiva ainda não foi totalmente elucidada.( 6 ) Estudos recentes demonstraram que há um subconjunto de pacientes
com FPI que são ANCA positivos no momento do diagnóstico ou que apresentam conversão para positividade de ANCA durante o acompanhamento e
posteriormente desenvolvem PAM.( 6 , 7 ) Kagiyama et al.( 7 ) avaliaram a positividade de ANCA e a incidência de PAM em 504 pacientes com
FPI. Os autores constataram que 36 (7%) dos pacientes eram ANCA positivos no momento do diagnóstico de FPI. Dos 264 pacientes que foram
posteriormente testados, 29 (11%) apresentaram conversão para positividade de ANCA durante os primeiros cinco anos de acompanhamento. Dos 35
pacientes que eram ANCA positivos no momento do diagnóstico ou que posteriormente apresentaram conversão para positividade de ANCA, 9 foram
diagnosticados com PAM. Dois medicamentos, o nintedanibe e a pirfenidona, ambos os quais retardam o declínio da função pulmonar, foram
recentemente aprovados para o tratamento da FPI.( 8 , 9 ) Porém, até hoje, não há nenhuma recomendação sobre o uso desses medicamentos em
pacientes com DPI associada a vasculite ANCA positiva, para os quais o uso de corticosteroides mais ciclofosfamida ou rituximabe foi
sugerido como melhor abordagem.( 6 ) Pode-se também considerar a combinação de micofenolato e corticosteroides. O prognóstico de pacientes
com DPI associada a vasculite ANCA positiva ainda não foi totalmente estabelecido. Em um estudo com 49 desses pacientes (82% com PAM), a
mortalidade foi de 34% nos primeiros 60 meses após o diagnóstico. Em uma revisão com 65 pacientes (85% com padrão de PIU) que foram
acompanhados por 45 meses, 35% apresentaram progressão da DPI e os 65% restantes apresentaram estabilidade ou melhora,( 6 ) o que sugere que
o prognóstico da vasculite ANCA positiva é melhor do que o da FPI.( 6 ) Em conclusão, este relato destaca o potencial para a ocorrência de
DPI, inclusive do padrão de PIU, em pacientes com vasculite ANCA positiva. Nessa forma de vasculite, o acometimento pulmonar intersticial
pode preceder as manifestações sistêmicas e os pacientes podem ser inicialmente diagnosticados com FPI. Ressaltamos a importância de uma
extensa investigação etiológica dos pacientes que apresentam padrão de PIU, especialmente daqueles nos quais a doença tem um curso
indolente. O diagnóstico de uma causa secundária pode facilitar a definição da melhor estratégia terapêutica e a determinação do prognóstico
desses pacientes.
