A 56-year-old male patient underwent percutaneous biopsy of a nodule in the right lung apex (Figure 1A). The tip of a 19-gauge coaxial
needle was positioned in the posterior chest wall (Figure 1B), and six samples of the lesion were obtained with a 20-gauge core needle. The
pathological analysis revealed squamous cell carcinoma. Using an anterior approach, we performed right upper lobectomy with tumor-free
margins. At 6 months of follow-up, a positron emission tomography-CT scan of the chest showed an 18F- fluorodeoxyglucose-avid soft tissue
mass (Figure 1C) in the T3-4 interspace, along the biopsy tract, as well as bone erosion of the right third rib posteriorly (Figure 1D),
suggesting tumor seeding. A subsequent CT scan of the chest, obtained two months later, confirmed local disease progression. We then
performed en bloc resection with disease-free pleural margins, and the pathological analysis confirmed that tumor seeding had occurred.
Figure 1.Nodule in the right lung apex and percutaneous biopsy of the same: in A, positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) scan showing the
nodule (arrow); in B, CT scan showing the point of insertion of the coaxial needle (arrow); in C, PET-CT scan after 6 months of follow-up,
showing an 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-avid soft tissue mass; and in D, CT scan after 6 months of follow-up, showing bone erosion of the right
third rib posteriorly (arrow). Tumor seeding along the biopsy route is exceedingly rare. Certain factors, such as the use of large-bore
cutting needles, increase the risk of such tumor cell dissemination, that risk also being greater when the tumor is an adenocarcinoma. Um
paciente de 56 anos de idade foi submetido a biópsia percutânea de um nódulo em ápice pulmonar direito (Figura 1A). A ponta de uma agulha
coaxial de 19 gauge foi posicionada na parede torácica posterior (Figura 1B), e seis amostras da lesão foram obtidas com uma agulha coaxial
de 20 gauge. A análise patológica revelou carcinoma de células escamosas. Utilizando uma abordagem anterior, realizamos lobectomia superior
direita com margens livres de tumor. Aos 6 meses de acompanhamento, a tomografia por emissão de pósitrons de tórax mostrou uma massa em
partes moles ávida por 18F fluordesoxiglicose (Figura 1C) no espaço intercostal T3-T4, no trajeto da biópsia, assim como erosão óssea em
região posterior do terceiro arco costal (Figura 1D), sugerindo implante tumoral. Posteriormente, a TC de tórax, realizada dois meses
depois, confirmou a progressão da doença local. Foi realizada então uma ressecção em bloco com margens pleurais livres de doença, e a
análise patológica confirmou implante tumoral em trajeto de biópsia. Figura 1.Nódulo em ápice pulmonar direito e biópsia percutânea do
mesmo: em A, tomografia por emissão de pósitrons (PET, do inglês positron emission tomography) com TC (PET-TC) mostrando o nódulo (seta); em
B, TC mostrando o ponto de inserção da agulha coaxial (seta); em C, PET-TC após 6 meses de acompanhamento, mostrando massa em partes moles
ávida por 18F fluordesoxiglicose; e em D; TC após 6 meses de acompanhamento, mostrando erosão óssea em região posterior do terceiro arco
costal (seta). O implante tumoral em trajeto de biópsia é extremamente raro. Certos fatores, como a utilização de agulhas de corte de grosso
calibre e tumor do tipo adenocarcinoma, aumentam o risco dessa disseminação de células tumorais.
