Rare cases of hypertrichosis have been associated with topically applied minoxidil. We present the first reported case in the Brazilian
literature of generalized hypertrichosis affecting a 5-year-old child, following use of minoxidil 5%, 20 drops a day, for hair loss. The
laboratory investigation excluded hyperandrogenism and thyroid dysfunction. Topical minoxidil should be used with caution in children. Rare
cases of hypertrichosis have been associated with topically applied minoxidil. It commonly affects the cheeks, upper lip, and chins but can
also appear in other areas of the body, with few cases reported in the pediatric population.1 We present the first reported case in Brazil
of generalized hypertrichosis affecting a 5-year-old child after using topical minoxidil. A pediatrician prescribed minoxidil 5% for a
5-year-old, female patient (20 drops a day) for hair loss. After two months, the parents noticed substantial hair growth on her back and
face, as well as a slight increase on her limbs, at which point they consulted dermatologists (Figure 1). Further, they noticed that her
eyelashes had become longer (Figure 1). The patient did not present comorbidities and the parents denied continuous use of medications.
After the dermatological examination, a laboratory investigation was performed, which excluded hyperandrogenism and thyroid dysfunction.
Figure 1Hypertrichosis on the back (a) and forehead (b). Elongated eyelashes (c) Hypertrichosis on the back (a) and forehead (b). Elongated
eyelashes (c) Minoxidil, an arteriolar vasodilator medication, is prescribed for androgenetic alopecia following reports of hypertrichosis
in patients treated for severe hypertension during the 70's. In 1988, its topical use was approved by the FDA for androgenetic alopecia in
men and later in women in 1992.2 Several clinical studies have been conducted to explain the exact mechanism by which topical minoxidil
promotes hair growth.2 Possible mechanisms include action on vasculature or on follicle cells DNA synthesis, with agonist effects on ATP-
sensitive potassium channels and increased anagen phase.2,3 Secondary hypertrichosis caused by topical minoxidil is more prevalent in women
than men. In 2003, a study showed a higher incidence for this side effect in a group treated with minoxidil 5% than in a group treated with
minoxidil 2%.4 Systemic absorption of the drug is typically minimal with topical therapy. However, absorption varies among individuals,
which explains the reports of tachycardia and palpitations with topical use of minoxidil, suggesting that it can reach high concentrations
in pharmacologically active plasma, especially in children.3,5-7 There is scarce information about its pharmacology in children, since it is
not normally used in this age group. Hypotheses on the pathogenesis of the diffuse hypertrichosis reaction routinely include systemic
absorption, as well as high sensitivity of the follicular apparatus to the medication.1,8 Differences were observed in the cutaneous and
systemic metabolism of topical substances applied in children compared to adults. This age group also experienced increased drug viability
and sometimes higher toxicity, due to greater body surface area in relation to weight.6 We found few reported cases of diffuse
hypertrichosis caused by topical minoxidil in children. We conclude that the concentration of 5% and low body weight may have favored the
systemic effect in our patient. Since minoxidil is also used for other forms of alopecia, including areata, its topical application in a
pediatric population may require caution.9 Conflict of Interest: None. Financial Support: None. Work perfomed at the Pontifícia Universidade
Católica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUC-RS) - Porto Alegre (RS), Brazil.
