Duodenal adenocarcinoma, a very rare malignant gastrointestinal tumor, mainly metastasizes via the lymphatic system. Metastases from
duodenal adenocarcinomas to the breast are very uncommon. A 31-year-old woman presented at our department with a left breast tumor. She had
a past medical history of duodenal adenocarcinoma. Physical examination on admission confirmed a 2.5-cm-diameter tumor in the outer lower
quadrant of the left breast. Computed tomography (CT) examination showed a soft lesion with tissue-like density and enlarged axillary lymph
nodes. Local excision was performed to remove the breast lesion. The findings of cytologic, histologic, and immunohistochemistry examination
indicated a breast metastasis from the previous duodenal adenocarcinoma. The patient was treated with palliative chemotherapy. Metastases
from duodenal adenocarcinoma to the breast are rare. The diagnosis depends on medical history, imaging, and pathologic examination including
immunohistochemistry. An accurate diagnosis is important to avoid unnecessary surgery. Duodenal adenocarcinoma is rare: although most small
bowel adenocarcinomas (56%) arise in the duodenum, small bowel cancers account for only 2% of all gastrointestinal cancers in the United
States.1,2 It mainly metastasizes via the lymphatic system; lymph node metastases are associated with a poor prognosis.3 Here, we report a
case of a young woman who we diagnosed as having a breast metastasis from a duodenal adenocarcinoma. A 31-year-old woman was admitted to our
hospital because of a left breast tumor. Her family history was noncontributory. She had undergone pancreaticoduodenectomy for a duodenal
adenocarcinoma 18 months previously and had received 6 courses of postoperative chemotherapy. A chest CT examination 4 months prior to the
current presentation had shown no abnormalities. Physical examination revealed a 2.5-cm-diameter tumor in the outer lower quadrant of the
left breast. Mammography showed a hyperdense mass with a circumscribed border (Figure 1) and ultrasound showed a 23-mm × 14-mm nodular low
echo in the outer lower quadrant of the left breast with a non-uniform texture and a well-defined boundary. Color Doppler flow images
displayed blood flow. Multiple axillary lymph nodes were identified; the largest measuring 11 mm × 5 mm (Figure 2). CT examination showed a
soft 22-mm × 17-mm lesion of tissue-like density with a central patchy low-density area in the lower quadrant of the left breast with a
well-defined boundary. Lymph nodes were identified in the left axilla (Figure 3B). Local excision was performed to remove the breast lesion
(Figure 3A), the provisional diagnosis being invasive carcinoma. Pathologic examination of the resected specimen showed poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma (Figure 4A). Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that mammary tumor cells were positive for CDX2 (Figure
5A), villin (Figure 5B), cytokeratin 20 (Figure 5C), and cytokeratin 7 (Figure 5D), but negative for estrogen receptors (Figure 5E) and
progesterone receptors (Figure 5F) and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (Figure 5G); 70% of the cells were Ki-67 positive (Figure
5H). Comparison of the pathological findings with those of the previous duodenal adenocarcinoma (Figure 4B) resulted in a final diagnosis of
a metastasis to the breast from duodenal adenocarcinoma. The patient was then treated with palliative chemotherapy. At the time of
submission of our manuscript, the patient was tolerating the new chemotherapy regimen well and had been followed for 2 months after a
definitive diagnosis had been made. Mammography showed a hyperdense mass with a circumscribed border. Ultrasound showed a 23-mm × 14-mm
nodular low echo in the outer lower quadrant of the left breast with a non-uniform texture and a well-defined boundary. Color Doppler flow
images displayed blood flow. Multiple axillary lymph nodes were identified; the largest measuring 11 mm × 5 mm. A. Gross examination showed
the breast lesion with the diameter of 2.5 cm in the outer lower quadrant of the left breast. B. Computed tomography examination showed a
soft 22-mm × 17-mm lesion of tissue-like density with a central patchy low-density area in the lower quadrant of the left breast with a
well-defined boundary. A. Metastatic duodenal adenocarcinoma to the left breast (H&E, 200×). B. Duodenal adenocarcinoma (H&E, 200×).
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed the mammary tumor cells were positive for CDX2 (A), villin (B), cytokeratin 20 (C), and cytokeratin 7
(D), but negative for estrogen receptors (E) and progesterone receptors (F) and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (G); 70% of the
cells were Ki-67 positive (H). Breast cancer is the commonest type of malignant tumor in women; however, metastases to the breast from
extramammary malignancies are very rare, accounting for only 0.43% of all malignant breast tumors.4 The most common sources of such
metastases are malignant melanoma, pulmonary, ovarian, renal, cervical, prostate, stomach, thyroid, and colorectal carcinomas, and small
bowel carcinoid tumors.5–9 To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of duodenal adenocarcinoma metastasizing to the
breast. Our patient presented after she had detected a breast mass. A chest CT examination 4 months previously had not shown a breast tumor.
She had a history of resection of a duodenal carcinoma. We, therefore, strongly suspected that the breast tumor might be metastatic
carcinoma. However, ultrasound and mammography did not suggest a malignant tumor. The patient underwent resection of the breast tumor and
comparison of the pathological sections of the excised specimen with those of the previous duodenal adenocarcinoma resulted in a diagnosis
of a metastasis from the duodenal carcinoma to the breast. The correct diagnosis was, therefore, crucial in avoiding unnecessary surgical
interventions. A diagnosis of metastasis to the breast must be confirmed by pathologic examination. When a patient's history reveals a
previous primary malignancy, the pathological characteristics, including immunohistochemical findings, of a breast lesion should be compared
with those of the previous primary tumor. A specific diagnosis cannot be made by imaging procedures, such as mammography, ultrasound or CT.
On mammography, breast metastases reportedly present as round lesions with smooth margins.10 The imaging findings in our case suggested a
benign tumor; however, pathological examination resulted in a diagnosis of metastatic poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Thus, the final
diagnosis depends on surgical resection or biopsy. Breast cancer can metastatic to the duodenum,11 there might be some relationship between
the 2 organ, but the mechanism is not yet understood and needs further study. Our patient illustrates that metastasis to the breast from
duodenal adenocarcinoma does occur. Despite its rarity, it should be considered in the differential diagnosis of an apparent primary mammary
carcinoma because the treatment and prognosis differ significantly. Those working in the field of breast diagnosis and therapy should be
aware of the possibility of metastases to the breast. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography This study was supported by grants from
Zhejiang Provincial Medical Science and Technology Planning Project (Grant Nos. 2013KYB249 and 2016KYB276). This research was approved by
the Wenzhou Central Hospital Ethics Committee. Patients gave informed consent, and trial document approval was obtained from the ethics
committee. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
