A 20-year-old female had undergone definitive surgical repair for pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum soon after birth. She was
referred to our institution with the chief complaint of clubbing fingers. A thorough examination revealed platypnea-orthodeoxia syndrome due
to an interatrial right-to-left shunt through a secundum atrial septal defect. Percutaneous closure with an Amplatzer Septal Occluder
resulted in resolution of the syndrome. Platypnea-orthodeoxia syndrome (POS) is characterized by dyspnea noted in an upright position and
relieved in a supine position (platypnea), and oxygen desaturation noted in an upright position (orthodeoxia).1 It can be caused by an
intracardiac shunt, an intrapulmonary shunt, or a ventilation-perfusion mismatch.1 Two clinical conditions must coexist in POS, including an
anatomical component of an atrial septal defect (ASD), a patent foramen ovale (PFO), or a fenestrated atrial septal aneurysm, and a
functional component of cardiac, pulmonary, abdominal, or other origin.1 The diagnostic criteria of POS include an interatrial
communication, a right-to-left shunt, absence of pulmonary arterial hypertension and right atrial hypertension, orthodeoxia, and platypnea.2
Herein we report a 20-year-old female who presented POS with clubbing fingers and orthodeoxia insidiously two decades after reconstruction
of right ventricular outflow tract for pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum (PA-IVS), and was treated by percutaneous closure of
a secundum ASD with an Amplatzer Septal Occluder (ASO). A 20-year-old female underwent reconstruction of right ventricular outflow tract for
PA-IVS soon after birth. Postoperative follow-up was uneventful. She was referred to our hospital with the chief complaint of insidious
clubbing fingers. Her family could not remember when her clubbing fingers appeared. At the outpatient clinic, neither lip cyanosis nor
oxygen desaturation was discernible. At admission, she was 54 kg in weight and 168 cm in height. Pulse rate was 82/min, and respiratory rate
20/min. Hemoglobin was 14.9 gm/L. Clubbing fingers were remarkable (Fig. 1A). Peripheral pulse oximeter showed marked fluctuations of oxygen
saturations (SpO2), ranging from 84% to 95% in the supine position and from 80% to 88% in the upright position. There was no pathological
heart murmur. Liver and blood coagulation functions were normal. Initial trans-thoracic echocardiography (TTE) with bubble study in the
supine position failed to detect any intracardiac shunt. However, TTE with bubble study performed in the seated position did reveal an
interatrial right-to-left shunt (Fig. 1B). Hemodynamic data are summarized in Table 1. There was a step-down of oxygen saturation from the
pulmonary vein to the left atrium, indicating an interatrial right-to-left shunt. Besides, there was no trans-atrial pressure gradient,
right ventricular hypertension, and pulmonary arterial hypertension. Intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) with Doppler showed a secundum ASD
with a right-to-left shunt. Balloon sizing showed an indentation of 21.84 mm in diameter (Fig. 1C). Before implantation, a bolus of 2000
units of heparin was infused into the delivery system. A 22-mm ASO was chosen to occlude this defect (Fig. 1D and E). After implantation,
ICE showed complete occlusion (Fig. 1F). We wiggled the cable to test the stability and relieved the device smoothly. Interestingly, the
anatomic lie of ASO was positioned more ventrally oblique in the present patient (Fig. 1G) than those in the usual patients with a secundum
ASD (Fig. 1H). SpO2 of ascending aorta and left ventricle elevated to 99–100%. In a 24-month follow-up, she was free of POS. There are four
noteworthy implications to be highlighted. First, our patient met four of the five diagnostic criteria, including 1) existence of an
interatrial communication, 2) right-to-left shunt, 3) no pulmonary hypertension or elevation of right atrial pressure, and 4) orthodeoxia
(SpO2 <90%). However, she did not have platypnea at the time of diagnosis. Not all patients presented simultaneously with platypnea and
orthodeoxia at first, and both of which can be detected only after performing postural change test.3 Platypnea may be difficult to discern
without a careful evaluation of dyspnea.3 Orthodeoxia can be masked by profound cyanosis, or even overlooked in patients with only mild
desaturation in the upright position, as seen in our patient with SpO2 of 80–88%. Hence, postural change test should be done, if there is a
suspicion of POS. Our patient presented with marked fluctuations of SpO2 in the supine and sitting positions. We think that this phenomenon
may be related to a dynamic flip-flap motion of the check valve that guards the interatrial septal defect. This aleatory or unpredictable
factor may be culpable for the marked fluctuations of oxygen saturations in the supine and sitting positions. Second, once the diagnosis of
POS is established, the underlying mechanisms and clinical conditions must be carefully differentiated to guide treatment thereafter. It is
important to search for not only cardiac maladies, but also concomitant pulmonary or abdominal pathology.12 TTE with bubble study is
valuable in detecting interatrial right-to-left shunt, while trans-esophageal echocardiography is useful in assessing the anatomy of ASD/PFO
with or without atrial septal aneurysm,4 prominent Eustachian valve,4 large aortic aneurysm,5 and extensive Chiari network with lipomatous
atrial septal hypertrophy.6 Cardiac catheterization is the gold standard in diagnosing cardiac POS, by excluding right heart hypertension
and confirming a step-down of SpO2 in the left atrium.4 Computed tomography can be used to identify distortion of the atrial septum caused
by aortic aneurysm,5 or to discriminate POS of pulmonary, abdominal, and other origins.4 Third, the underlying pathogenesis of interatrial
right-to-left shunt in the presence of normal pulmonary arterial pressure in our patient may be ascribed to 1) anatomic disarray of the
septum primum which had been forced by severe tricuspid regurgitation in the setting of PA-IVS, bulged toward the left atrium, and
redirected the inferior caval flow and tricuspid regurgitation shunting preferentially to the left atrium, and 2) long-term influence of
decreased compliance of a relatively smaller right ventricle in spite of successful reconstruction of right ventricular outflow tract
without significant pressure gradient. Fourth, management of POS must be directed to the underlying pathology and clinical conditions. Most
POS patients have a secundum ASD or a PFO.7 A large review of 157 POS patients, with an interatrial right-to-left shunt, indicates that
percutaneous closure achieved successful closure or symptom resolution in 148 of 151 patients (98%).7 Interestingly, the anatomic lie of ASO
in our patient was tilting more ventrally oblique. The interatrial opening in our patient would be smaller if we looked the atrial septum in
front from the right atrium, and larger if we took a bird's-eye view from the ascending aorta. In conclusion, clubbing fingers may herald
full-fledged POS. Postural change test is essential to detect subtle orthodeoxia. TTE with bubble study is a useful tool in revealing an
interatrial right-to-left shunt. Cardiac catheterization is the gold standard in diagnosing cardiac POS, and percutanous closure is the
treatment of choice for cardiac POS with a secundum ASD or a PFO. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. IVC, inferior vena
cava; RA, right atrium; LA, left atrium; RPV, right pulmonary vein; SVC, superior vena cava; RV, right ventricle; MPA, main pulmonary
artery; LPA, left pulmonary artery; RPA, right pulmonary artery; Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricle; SpO2, oxygen saturation; EDP, end diastolic
pressure. *There was a step-down of oxygen saturation from the pulmonary vein to the left atrium, indicating an interatrial right-to-left
shunt.
