Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) has been defined as “asthma of the esophagus” for the large number of similarities between the two diseases.
Omalizumab is an anti-Immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibody currently approved only in allergic IgE-mediated severe persistent uncontrolled asthma
and in chronic spontaneous urticaria unresponsive to antihistamines, but it has been tried in other diseases, too. We present herein the
case of a 13-year-old boy, affected from preschool age by severe chronic allergic asthma poorly controlled despite a generous long-term
therapy, and, since he was 8 years old, by eosinophilic esophagitis, responsive to courses of strict elimination diet and semi-elemental
diet, even if very burdensome for his quality of life. At the age of 11.5 years, for inadequate asthma control, he started to receive
therapy with omalizumab. After the first month and for the entire duration (18 months) of omalizumab treatment, asthma was well controlled,
long-term conventional therapy was gradually withdrawn and lung- function improved. Concerning EoE, after an initial clinical but not
histological remission during the first few months of treatment with omalizumab, the patient experienced an exacerbation of gastrointestinal
symptoms. Therefore, he started treatment with topical steroids which was effective to improve gastrointestinal symptoms. However, EoE is
still steroid-dependent. Currently, he continues both treatments: omalizumab for asthma and topical steroid for EoE. This case report
confirms that omalizumab is an effective treatment in patients with severe persistent, uncontrolled asthma. On the other hand, in our
patient it did not produce persistent improvement neither on symptoms nor on biopsy findings of EoE. The outcome of this case might indicate
different pathogenic mechanism(s) of the two diseases. Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) has been defined as “asthma of the esophagus” for the
several similarities between the two diseases [1, 2]. The prevalence of both diseases is increasing over time –as other atopic conditions-
and, they often coexist: asthma has been reported in higher percentage (up to 80 %) in subjects with EoE . Both asthma and EoE are chronic
immune-mediated and most likely antigen - driven conditions . Food allergy often precedes asthma and it seems to be driving EoE, in
children. In adult and teenagers, allergic sensitization to aeroallergens is often associated not only with asthma but also with EoE,
worsening their prognosis . Inflammation of mucosa and submucosa with a typical infiltration by eosinophils is hallmark of both conditions .
Allergen avoidance may improve symptoms in both diseases without curing them . On the basis of similarities it is reasonable to realize that
similarities “could mirror” also in therapy. Omalizumab is a humanized monoclonal anti-Immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibody currently approved
only in allergic IgE-mediated severe persistent asthma and in chronic spontaneous urticaria unresponsive to antihistamines but it has been
tried as off-label treatment in other diseases , in particular in some isolated cases of EoE with different results as described in some
previous reports . We report the case of a 13-year-old boy, affected by severe chronic asthma inadequately controlled with high dose of
inhaled corticosteroids and montelukast and EoE treated with omalizumab -for a longer period (18 months) than previous reports for EoE- with
full remission of allergic asthma but not of eosinophlic esophagitis. A 13-year-old boy, affected by severe chronic asthma with abnormal
lung function: a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1 < 80 %) of the predicted value before bronchodilation with β2 agonist: salbutamol.
The first respiratory symptoms appeared when he was about two years old. He had dust mites and olive pollen allergies -confirmed by skin
prick tests (average diameter of wheal for Dermatophagoides Pteronyssinus, Dermatophagoides Farinae, and Olive pollen: 9, 7, and 5 mm,
respectively) and specific IgE levels (100, 82 and 68 IU/ml, respectively) and high total IgE (1003 IU/ml) levels with normal eosinophil
count (110/mmc). He performed long-term anti-asthma therapy with high-dose inhaled corticosteroids (fluticasone up to 750 μg/day), also
associated with a leukotriene receptor antagonist (montelukast) and sublingual specific immunotherapy (SLIT) with dust mite extract (since
he was 5 years old for 3 years continuously) with poor disease control (without any precise seasonal correlation) and reduction of FEV1
according to GINA guidelines (Fig. 1) (http://www.ginasthma.org/documents/1/Pocket-Guide-for-Asthma-Management-and-prevention).Fig. 1FEV1 (%
predictive value) longitudinal profile in our patient. Changes in forced respiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) over time are shown for different
treatments. FEV1 significantly improved during omalizumab therapy. The most representative detections are represented FEV1 (% predictive
value) longitudinal profile in our patient. Changes in forced respiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) over time are shown for different treatments.
FEV1 significantly improved during omalizumab therapy. The most representative detections are represented When he was 8 years old, for the
appearance of gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, vomiting, heartburn), after endoscopy-biopsy of the upper digestive tract, eosinophilic
esophagitis was diagnosed (Fig. 2a and b).Fig. 2Esophageal histology. An evident eosinophilic cellular infiltrate was encountered in the
esophageal epithelium; intercellular oedema as well as basal zone hyperplasia were also appreciable (a) [Haematoxylin and Eosin staining
(H&E), original magnification x200]; sometimes eosinophils were organized in micro-abscesses (b) (H&E, original magnification x 400)
Esophageal histology. An evident eosinophilic cellular infiltrate was encountered in the esophageal epithelium; intercellular oedema as well
as basal zone hyperplasia were also appreciable (a) [Haematoxylin and Eosin staining (H&E), original magnification x200]; sometimes
eosinophils were organized in micro-abscesses (b) (H&E, original magnification x 400) The prick tests were positive to milk (average
diameter of wheal for milk extract 8 mm; α-lactoalbumin 10 mm; β-lactoglobulin 7 mm; casein 6 mm; Prick by prick with fresh milk 10 mm) and
soy (5 mm). He was placed on semi-elemental diet with benefit on esophageal symptoms and a strict food allergens (milk, dairy products and
soy) avoidance, and histology (performed after 3 months since the beginning of each therapy, respectively at 9.3 and 10 years of age) but
with heavy burden on his quality of life. Symptomatic response to therapy (improvement/impairment/no change) was assessed evaluating changes
of the patient’s answers concerning the following items: frequency of trouble swallowing; duration of trouble swallowing (≥/< 5 min); pain
when swallowing. Furthermore, a visual dysphagia question addressed the severity of dysphagia when consuming food of 8 distinct
consistencies. Behavioural adaptations (avoidance, modification, and slow eating of various foods) also were assessed in the context of
consuming 8 distinct food consistencies . Afterwards, courses of topical steroid therapy (oral budesonide) were also carried out with
symptomatic and histological efficacy. The latter was detected after the second (at 10.6 years of age), and the sixth run (under omalizumab,
at 12.6 years). However, the effects (on both symptoms and histology) were transient and the treatment was sometimes complicated by oral
candidiasis, for which the therapy was interrupted and antimycotic treatment was performed by patient. At the age of 11.5 years, for
inadequate asthma control (in the last 2 months he presented daytime symptoms 3 to 4 times/week, some night waking due to asthma, reliever
needed 2 to 3 times/week, limitation of his activities- e.g. going upstairs- due to asthma) (http://www.ginasthma.org/documents/1/Pocket-
Guide-for-Asthma-Management-and-prevention), he started to receive therapy with omalizumab. According to technical data sheet, the dose and
frequency of dosing were guided by a nomogram that is derived from the total serum IgE level and the body mass index (375 mg subcutaneously
every 2 weeks). After the first month of treatment, conventional long-term therapy for asthma was reduced up to the suspension (at the 4th
month of omalizumab therapy), with an improvement both in asthma symptoms and in spirometric parameters for the entire duration of treatment
(18 months) (Fig. 1). Broncodilatator reversibility test remained positive over time, before and after omalizumab therapy, with a
significant increase in FEV1 after bronchodilator (salbutamol) indicating a reversible airflow obstruction and supports the diagnosis of
asthma (http://www.ginasthma.org/documents/1/Pocket-Guide-for-Asthma-Management-and-prevention). Regarding EoE, during the first three
months of treatment the patient presented in clinical remission even if not accompanied by histological remission (endoscopy performed at
the 3rd months of treatment). Afterwards, he experienced an exacerbation of gastrointestinal symptoms with confirmation of eosinophilic
infiltrates in the esophageal mucosa (endoscopy at the 7th month of treatment). Therefore, he performed treatment with topical steroids
(galenical oral viscous budesonide) with improvement of nausea and vomiting. In detail, we used a product prepared by the chemist in the
laboratory of our pharmacy. The product was made mixing a vial of budesonide (1 mg/2 ml) with 5 g of sweetener (2.5 g of aspartame and 2.5 g
dextrose) [10, 11]. On the other hand, at the 18th month of omalizumab therapy the patient continues to have a good asthma control according
to GINA assessment (http://www.ginasthma.org/documents/1/Pocket-Guide-for-Asthma-Management-and-prevention) without other anti-asthmatic
therapy and his EoE is steroid-dependent. He is going on treatment with omalizumab s.c. and viscous budesonide per os. The patient, with
severe respiratory and esophageal symptoms, had a quality of life seriously compromised by his allergic diseases. Despite a heavy long-term
treatment with high dose of inhalant steroids combined antileukotriene, his asthma remained poorly controlled; the semi-elemental diet and
the strict food avoidance of milk and dairy products, although had provided an improvement, though transient, in esophageal symptoms, were
very burdensome for the patient. Omalizumab was effective therapy for severe persistent asthma in our patient, according to its conventional
indication, but it did not produce persistent clinical improvement nor endoscopic and histological changes of his EoE. Few cases of EoE
treated with omalizumab (n = 2 , n = 9 , n = 15 ) have been reported in literature. Authors of the first two studies described improvement
in symptoms without a reduction of oesophageal eosinophils in all patients treated with omalizumab and food avoidance [6, 7]. The third one,
a pilot study, open label, on 15 patients treated with omalizumab for 12 weeks, maintaining dietary restriction, found a histological and
clinical improvement only in 33 % of the patients (subjects with low peripheral blood absolute eosinophil count) . In our patient, different
than other cases previously reported, no dietary restriction was maintained to verify the efficacy of the only treatment with omalizumab
without risk of confounding. Dietary restriction is one of the main treatment options in patients with EoE and food allergy. Therefore, in
the previous studies it is likely a possible overlap of effects of two treatments (food avoidance plus omalizumab). This is only a single
clinical case. However, considering the limitations of assumptions based on it, the therapeutic failure of omalizumab in EoE of our patient
might highlight that omalizumab probably does not work on allergen-specific IgE-mediated pathogenic mechanism of EoE, or at least not
mainly. In EoE allergic sensitization drives the formation of allergen-specific both IgE and T cells and they potentially have independent
roles in the underlying disease pathogenesis . Therefore, our data indicate that asthma and EoE, even sharing a similar allergenic features,
are likely mantained by different pathogenic mechanisms, which need to be better understood. In literature a unique case of EoE induced by
SLIT to pollens is described. A seasonal and geographical pattern of EoE which may be compatible with increased airborne allergen was
reported, too [14, 15]. Cautiously, considering the literature paucity about a possible correlation between EoE and SLIT, it might be
hypothesized that, likely, sublingual dust mite immunotherapy might cause or exacerbate EoE by exposing the esophagus to host dust mites
allergens (HDM) every day. However, investigations are needed. Notwithstanding, in our patient, esophageal symptoms were correlated
temporally to food allergen-exposure and not to airborne (and in particular to HDM) exposure (esophageal symptoms appeared about three
months after the end of SLIT to HDM). We are aware of the limitations of assumptions based on one case only, but we report our experience
because in our knowledge this is the first case of EoE treated with omalizumab for so a long period (18 months) and it may help to elucidate
the pathophysiology of EoE and to select patients affected with EoE that could benefit of anti-IgE treatment. In the recent pilot study
omalizumab –induced remission of EoE was limited to subjects with low peripheral blood eosinophil count. Instead, our patient, despite a
normal-low eosinophilic serum count before and during the entire duration of treatment, did not respond to omalizumab. In conclusion, the
Th2 cytokines, IL-13 and IL-4, remain, currently, the most promising antieosinophil targets also in EoE and more studies are required in
order to clarify the possibility of new therapeutic approaches such as omalizumab for EoE management. The present case report confirms that
omalizumab is an effective treatment in patients with severe persistent, uncontrolled asthma. On the other hand, in our patient it did not
produce persistent improvement neither on symptoms nor on biopsy findings of EoE. The outcome of this case might indicate different
pathogenic mechanism(s) of the two diseases. Well-designed and large studies are needed. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. eosinophilic esophagitis forced expiratory volume in 1 second haematoxylin and Eosin high power fields
immunoglobulin E Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions GBP & SA: Study
conception and design of the manuscript. SA and GBP: Writing up of first draft of the paper. SC, GM, AI, LC, FC, MV, MMDG & GC: Critical
revision of the article. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
