Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 36 Final Diagnosis: Thyroid hemorrhage Symptoms: Shortness of breath
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Thyroidectomy Specialty: Surgery Rare disease Spontaneous goiter hemorrhage is a rare entity that can lead
to life-threatening respiratory compromise. Goiter hemorrhages are usually due to effects of anticoagulation or neoplastic processes. The
hormonal effects of pregnancy may also lead to such life-threatening goiter hemorrhages in the immediate postpartum period. We report the
case of a 36-year-old woman who complained of progressive neck swelling as well as eventual shortness of breath in the immediate postpartum
period. Computed tomography scans and ultrasound of the neck revealed an enlarged and heterogenous thyroid with airway compression. The
patient underwent an emergent subtotal thyroidectomy to alleviate the mass effect on the airway. Upon resection, the thyroid was noted to
contain a goiter hemorrhage with no signs of neoplastic degeneration on pathology. Pregnancy is a known hormonal stressor that routinely
increases the size of the thyroid and also predisposes patients to goiter formation. In rare cases, thyroid goiters may be predisposed to
hemorrhage, causing airway obstruction and necessitating urgent surgical intervention. Spontaneous thyroid hemorrhage is an extremely rare
condition with few documented cases in the literature . The few cases noted have been attributed either to anticoagulation , anaplastic
thyroid cancer , or vascular rupture . Acute airway compromise is a possible life-threatening complication of such a hemorrhage and warrants
urgent intervention . None of the cases previously described in the literature directly relate to pregnancy or the immediate post-partum
period. Here, we present a case report of a spontaneous postpartum goiter hemorrhage causing acute airway obstruction, necessitating urgent
operative intervention. Due to the unique hormonal stressors on the thyroid brought about by pregnancy , pre-existing goiters may be more
predisposed to enlarge and become more susceptible to rupture. To the best of our knowledge, a postpartum goiter hemorrhage with airway
compromise has not been documented previously in the literature. A 36-year-old African-American woman who was postpartum day 1 after a
vaginal delivery developed sudden onset of bilateral neck fullness with minimum pain along with mild dysphagia. She had no associated
hoarseness, stridor, or shortness of breath. There was no visible goiter or neck swelling noted from the time of initial presentation for
delivery through the initial postpartum period. The delivery was uneventful without significant hemorrhage or use of oxytocin to aid labor.
Her past medical history was significant for prior kidney stone, UTI, and chlamydial infection. She had no known thyroid disease or notable
goiter prior to this presentation and she was not on any anticoagulation. Throughout her last pregnancy she denied noticing any new changes
in her neck. Past surgeries included appendectomy and cholecystectomy. She has had a total of 14 pregnancies with 11 deliveries (6 full-term
births and 5 preterm). Her vitals were HR 90, BP 110/70 RR 18, and saturation was 98% on room air. On physical exam she was calm and
cooperative without notable tremor or sweating. No exophthalmos was noted. Her neck was visibly enlarged bilaterally (Figure 1) with a large
and minimally tender thyroid appreciated on palpation. There was no notable stridor or bruit on examination of the neck. Initial ultrasound
of the neck demonstrated a thyroid right lobe measuring 9.4×6.6×2.8 cm and left lobe measuring 9.8×5×3.7 cm. The thyroid was heterogenous
with notable edema calcification and possible hemorrhage. Her labs were T3 total 1.63, T4 free.67, T4 total 8, TSH 1.19, WBC 10, PT 10, and
INR 1.0 with PTT 26.5. Because the patient was clinically stable, she was initially managed conservatively. However, on postpartum day 2 she
developed progressive dysphagia followed by hoarseness and shortness of breath. A CT of the neck was performed, which showed clear
compressive effects on the trachea (Figure 2) as well as enlarged heterogenous thyroid lobes (Figures 3, 4). The patient was diagnosed with
a post-partum thyroid hemorrhage and taken to the operating room for an urgent subtotal thyroidectomy to relieve the tracheal compression.
Upon resection there was an old hemorrhage visible within the thyroid (Figure 5). Pathology findings of the specimen noted a multinodular
goiter with adenomatoid nodules. The specimen weighed 142 grams and its size was 8×5.5×4 cm and 8×4.5×44cm (Figure 6), a notable increase
from the size on the ultrasound performed earlier. Gray-maroon, congested, focally gelatinous nodules were noted (Figure 5). Post-
operatively, the patient’s hoarseness resolved and her swallowing improved. Her Jackson-Pratt (JP) drain was removed on post-operative day
(POD) 1. She was started on 0.1 mg Levothyroxine daily. She was discharged on POD 3 and upon return for follow-up on POD 21 she remained
asymptomatic with labs in normal range. Pregnancy has known effects on pre-existing thyroid nodules, causing them to enlarge , and has also
been demonstrated to increase the development of new thyroid nodules, pre-disposing to formation of multinodular goiter . This is
hypothesized to be mediated by increased levels of β-HCG in the blood . The β-HCG has known thyrotropic function, as its units are nearly
85% similar to that of TSH, the main hormonal stimulator of thyroid function . Overall, pregnancy produces thyroid dysfunction in 10–50% of
women, depending on the level of iodine deficiency . A separate entity, subacute thyroiditis, is also common post-partum and affects
approximately 5.4% of pregnancies . It usually manifests as thyroid gland tenderness along with non-specific symptoms like fatigue,
constipation, and lethargy. Subacute thyroiditis usually presents 3–6 months postpartum, is characterized by lymphocytic infiltration of the
thyroid, and can lead to hyper- or hypothyroidism. It is usually self-limiting without need for medical management because thyroid function
usually returns to normal within 6 months . In the case outlined above, thyroid function tests were within normal levels, effectively ruling
out postpartum subacute thyroiditis in this patient. However, the role of β-HCG thyrotropic effects on her pre-existing goiter cannot be
ruled out. This patient had a total of 14 pregnancies, each of which added incremental hormonal stressors on her thyroid and likely
exacerbated her goiter. It is plausible that increased straining during contractions and birth had caused an intraparenchymal bleed within
the goiter. To the best of our knowledge, this type of spontaneous postpartum thyroid hemorrhage has not been previously documented in the
literature. The rapid growth in size combined with evidence of bleeding on ultrasound and CT scan indicate that the majority of goiter
growth and mass effect in the postpartum course of this patient was indeed due to an acute and spontaneous hemorrhage. Once a thyroid
hemorrhage has been identified in a patient, the management is dependent on presence of associated symptoms. The majority of spontaneous
thyroid hemorrhages are small and only cause minimal pain and discomfort to patients . These cases can be carefully observed as long as the
patient has no symptoms of airway compression and there is no evidence that the hemorrhage is continuing to expand . Any case of a larger
thyroid hemorrhage that continues to expand despite medical therapy or presents with symptoms of tracheal compression is an emergency, which
requires establishing a secure airway as soon as possible followed by an operative exploration of the neck . It is important to prepare for
an emergent surgical airway because intubation may not be possible due to distortion of the airway. In the majority of cases, a subtotal
thyroidectomy is necessary; however, if the hemorrhage and mass effect are localized to 1 thyroid lobe, a lobectomy may be sufficient .
Pregnancy commonly exacerbates or precipitates pre-existing goiters through several mechanisms. While symptoms usually are self-limiting and
can be managed medically, in rare instances postpartum goiter complications can quickly lead to airway compromise and may need emergent
surgical intervention. Failure to make a timely diagnosis may quickly lead to patient death, especially when airway distortion makes late
intubation extremely difficult. Clinicians should be alert to this rare but life-threatening possibility in all pregnant and post-partum
women with goiters. Grossly enlarged neck, which was notable on postpartum day 2. Coronal neck CT demonstrating heterogeneous thyroid with
mass effect on airway. Enlarged right thymic lobe with intraparenchymal heterogenous fluid. Left thymic lobe with intraparenchymal
heterogenous fluid and tracheal displacement to the left. Thyroid gland specimen immediately after resection. Visible hemorrhage inside the
thyroid.
