Dravet syndrome, a rare genetic disorder with early-onset epileptic encephalopathy, was first described by Dravet in 1978. Dravet syndrome
is most frequently caused by various mutations of the SCN1A gene encoding the type 1 subunit of the neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel.
Two sisters of a non-consanguineous Palestinian family from the Arab community in Israel attended our child development and pediatric
neurology clinic due to recurrent seizures and developmental delay. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes of all
family members and a SCN1A mutation in exon 10 was revealed by Sanger sequencing in both affected siblings but not in the parents. Our data
present a case of Dravet syndrome caused by a novel heterozygous SCN1A deletion (c.1458_1465delCTCTAAGT) in two affected siblings. Our
findings add to the spectrum of mutations known in the SCN1A gene and confirm parental mosaicism as a mechanism relevant for transmission of
this disease. These cases confirm parental mosaicism in the transmission of Dravet syndrome and add to the spectrum of known mutations of
the SCN1A gene. Repeated reports on parental mosaicism should remind us that there is a risk of recurrence even if the mutation is
apparently de novo. Dravet syndrome (DS), a rare genetic disorder with early-onset epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE), was first described by
Dravet in 1978 . It is also known in the literature as “severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy.” Initially, the electroencephalogram (EEG) is
generally normal, but shows characteristically generalized spike-wave activity later in the disease . A febrile seizure is usually the
initial manifestation. Afterwards, different seizure types evolve, such as tonic-clonic and myoclonic seizures, as well as absences. DS is
associated with ataxia, slowed psychomotor development, intellectual disability, and is often refractory to anticonvulsant medication [3,
4]. DS is an autosomal dominant disease that is mainly caused by various mutations of the SCN1A gene encoding the type 1 subunit of the
neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel . Mutations reported to cause DS are usually truncating as well as missense mutations in SCN1A
resulting in haploinsufficiency. Most of the SCN1A mutations are de novo mutations; this explains why parents and siblings are usually not
affected. However besides de novo cases, there have been reports of parental mosaicism in the literature . In this study, we report a novel
SCN1A deletion in DS transmitted by parental mosaicism. The novel heterozygous deletion (c.1458_1465delCTCTAAGT) was shown by direct
sequencing of the SCN1A gene in two affected siblings. The clinical phenotype revealed typical features of DS in both patients, with minor
differences. The reoccurrence of the same mutation in the two children with no detection of the mutation in parents’ lymphocytes indicates a
genetic mosaicism in one of the parents. This research was prospectively reviewed and approved by the ethics committee in our center. Two
siblings of a non-consanguineous Palestinian family (Fig. 1a) from the Arab community in Israel attended our child development and pediatric
neurology clinic due to recurrent seizures and developmental delay.Fig. 1 a Family pedigree: the parents are not related. Squares indicate
males and circles females. Affected patients are filled black. b Electropherogram showing the same heterozygous deletion in SCN1A in both
affected children (A4 and A5), but no deletion in the parents or the healthy child (A1, A2, A3). Sequences have been reverse complemented to
show the forwarding sequence. The deleted sequence (delCTCTAAGT) is given in a red box in the two patients A4 and A5 a Family pedigree: the
parents are not related. Squares indicate males and circles females. Affected patients are filled black. b Electropherogram showing the same
heterozygous deletion in SCN1A in both affected children (A4 and A5), but no deletion in the parents or the healthy child (A1, A2, A3).
Sequences have been reverse complemented to show the forwarding sequence. The deleted sequence (delCTCTAAGT) is given in a red box in the
two patients A4 and A5 The first patient is a 7-year-old Palestinian girl from the Arab community in Israel; she was born to non-
consanguineous parents after a full-term pregnancy by normal delivery with a normal birth weight of 3.1 kg. According to her parents she had
normal development until the age of 1 year. At this age she was hospitalized because of a generalized tonic-clonic convulsion during febrile
disease. She was discharged with the diagnosis of simple febrile convulsions. A few months later she had recurrent episodes of febrile
convulsions. She underwent an EEG recording, which was normal. At the age of 2 years she had several attacks of non-febrile generalized
tonic-clonic seizures; every attack lasted for 3 to 7 minutes followed by 10 to 15 minutes of a postictal state. Another interictal EEG
after sleep deprivation and photic stimulation was normal. Furthermore, karyotype testing and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were
carried out when she was 2-years old and found to be normal. She also underwent cerebrospinal fluid examination for protein, glucose,
lactate levels and cell count, yielding normal results. Routine metabolic screening was normal. Ophthalmologic and hearing examinations were
normal. She was further followed by our pediatric neurology and child development clinic. Her examination revealed no dysmorphic features
and no visceral enlargement. She showed mild motor and cognitive delay but could stand and walk with support, and could speak up to 15 words
with good communication abilities. Her neurologic examination revealed normal tone and normal tendon reflexes of her lower and upper limbs.
Babinski sign was normal. Her cranial nerves, sensory perception and cerebellar function were normal. For the seizures she was treated with
valproic acid and topiramate, with good response. She attended special education kindergarten, with speech therapy and occupational therapy.
At the most recent examination, at the age of 7 years, she had normal intelligence and attended a regular school with assistance because of
learning disabilities and attention deficit disorder. The second patient is a 3.5-year-old Palestinian girl from the Arab community in
Israel who is the younger sister of patient 1. She was born after a full-term pregnancy by normal delivery, with normal birth weight of 3.0
kg. At the age of 1 month, a small ventricular septal defect was diagnosed, but it resolved spontaneously at 1 year of age. At the age of
four months she was hospitalized for elective umbilical hernia surgery. Immediately after the surgery she had fever due to a urinary tract
infection leading to a focal convulsion involving her right upper and lower extremities. The convulsion lasted 5 minutes. She underwent
medical investigation including EEG recording and brain MRI, which were normal. Later she had recurrent right focal seizures with fever. At
the age of 1.5 years she also had recurrent non-febrile focal seizures of her right extremities, generalized tonic-clonic seizures and focal
seizures with secondary generalization. She was treated with carbamazepine, valproic acid, rectal diazepam and levetiracetam, with partial
improvement. At this time, because of the recurrent non-febrile generalized tonic-clonic seizures, she underwent several EEG recordings
after sleep deprivation and photic stimulation, which were normal. Furthermore, karyotype testing and brain MRI were carried out, and found
to be normal. Laboratory tests, including cerebrospinal fluid examination for protein, glucose, lactate levels and cell count, yielded
normal results. Routine metabolic screening was normal. Ophthalmologic and hearing examinations were normal. She was followed by our
pediatric neurology and child development clinic. Her examination at the age of 3.5 years revealed no dysmorphic features and no visceral
enlargement. She showed a severe cognitive delay; her gross motor abilities were intact but she had severe speech and language deficits. Her
neurologic examination revealed normal tone and normal tendon reflexes of her lower and upper limbs. Babinski sign was normal. Her cranial
nerves, sensory perception and cerebellar function were normal. Her developmental evaluation revealed mild to moderate intellectual
disability and she is attending special education. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes of all family members, using
standard procedures. A SCN1A mutation in exon 10 was revealed by Sanger sequencing in the index patient. The truncating mutation
(NM_001165963.1:c.1458_1465delCTCTAAGT; NP_001159435.1:p.Ser487GlufsTer6) is novel to the best of our knowledge (Fig. 1b). We then sequenced
the entire exon 10 of all family members using Sanger sequencing. To our surprise, both affected children had the same mutation, whereas the
mutation was not detected by Sanger sequencing in either of the parents. To exclude the possibility of a different biological father, a
paternity test was performed using microsatellite analysis, and it confirmed paternity (data not shown). DS is most frequently caused by
various mutations of the SCN1A gene encoding the subunit 1 of the neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel . To date, about 600 SCN1A mutations
have been identified in DS . The majority of SCN1A mutations are de novo, and most of them are of paternal origin . Our finding of a novel
truncating mutation (NM_001165963.1:c.1458_1465delCTCTAAGT; NP_001159435.1:p.Ser487GlufsTer6) adds to the spectrum of SCN1A mutations
causing DS. The pathomechanism in known mutations is assumed to be a loss of function of the mutated allele; this matches with the
truncating type of mutation found in our family and provides additional evidence of the pathogenicity of the 8-base pairs (bp) deletion.
Moreover, our results demonstrate that the mechanism of transmission in this family is most likely a parental mosaicism. As both children
but neither of the parents carry the mutation it is likely that one of the parents carries a germline mutation that is not detectable in
lymphocytes due to mosaicism. Unfortunately, no semen of the father and no other tissues were available for further analyses of the mosaic
pattern. There might even be a low mutation load in one of the parents that could not be detected due to limitations of the sensitivity of
Sanger sequencing. The reoccurrence of the same mutation in the two children with no detection of the mutation in the parents’ lymphocytes
indicates that even apparent de novo mutations can reoccur in siblings, most likely because of gonadal mosaic mutations. We recommend
genetic counseling and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) when parents have a child with a SCN1A mutation, since there is an increased
chance of bearing another baby with the same mutation. It is important for genetic counselors to know that the mechanism of genetic
mosaicism with somatic or germline mutations seems to be more common than expected . Both patients showed similar clinical manifestations
including epilepsy and cognitive disabilities. Despite these similarities, some differences exist. Patient 1 has well-controlled epilepsy
and normal intelligence, but with attention deficit and learning disabilities. Patient 2 has a mild to moderate intellectual disability and
attends a special education school. She has intractable recurrent non-febrile generalized tonic-clonic seizures. These cases illustrate that
the same mutation in the same family can cause variable phenotypes of DS. These cases confirm parental mosaicism in the transmission of DS
and add to the spectrum of known SCN1A mutations. Repeated reports on parental mosaicism should remind us that there is a risk of recurrence
even if the mutation is apparently de novo. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of our patients for publication of this
case report and the accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Base
pairs Dravet syndrome Electroencephalogram Early-onset epileptic encephalopathy Magnetic resonance imaging Pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions RS and LS conceived of the
study, and participated in its coordination and contributed in writing the manuscript. MM carried out the clinical diagnosis and analyzed
the patient data and helped in writing the manuscript. HH and PB carried out the molecular genetics approach and helped to draft the
manuscript. MA analyzed and interpreted the patient data and contributed in critical writing of the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. We are grateful to the family members who took part in this study. This work has been funded by the DFG
trilateral project (Reference number SCHO 754/5-2).
