Musculoskeletal injuries following seizures have a high morbidity and mortality. These injuries are often missed and the diagnosis is
delayed due to a lack of clinical suspicion and appropriate investigations. We report a case of 72 years old male with simultaneous
bilateral central acetabular fracture dislocation and bilateral posterior shoulder fracture dislocation secondary to an epileptic seizure.
Present study highlights the significance of clinical suspicion and clinico-radiological evaluation for diagnosis of a rare injury following
episode of seizures. Simultaneous fracture dislocation of all four limbs treated with a holistic approach can lead to a good functional
recovery. Surgical management with open reduction and internal fixation is preferred and replacement arthroplasty should be reserved for
cases with implant failure and elderly patients. Injuries around the shoulder, hip joint and vertebral compression fractures following
epilepsy episode are described in medical literature.1, 2, 3, 4 The possible mechanism of musculoskeletal injury following seizures is due
to severe muscle contraction.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 Without direct trauma, simultaneous acetabular fracture and shoulder fracture
dislocation are extremely rare. Central acetabular fracture is a complicated and life-threatening injury because of hypo-volume shock from
severe blood loss.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 Musculoskeletal injuries following seizures have a high morbidity and mortality.4, 5, 6, 7, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17 These injuries are often missed and the diagnosis is delayed due to a lack of clinical suspicion and appropriate
investigations.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 15, 16, 17 We report a case of 72 years old male with simultaneous bilateral central acetabular fracture
dislocation and bilateral posterior shoulder fracture dislocation secondary to an epileptic seizure. A 72 years old male patient presented
in our emergency services department following two episodes of generalized tonic clonic seizures. He had no trauma and past epilepsy
episodes. On clinical examination, his pulse rate was 100 per minute and systolic blood pressure was 90 mmHg and diastolic pressure was
50 mmHg. The respiratory and abdomen system examination were unremarkable. Patient presented with hypo-volume shock and was treated with
hypertonic solution and plasma expanders. Once patient was hemodynamically stable, computed tomography of the brain was performed and found
within normal limit. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain revealed multiple ischemic foci, suggesting small vessels disease. After
postictal period, patient had severe pain, deformity and reduced movements of both shoulder and hip joints. The neurological examination was
within normal limits. Clinical examination showed swelling and deformity around both shoulder joints. On examination of the hip joint,
bilateral hip deformity and painful movements were found. The distal pulsations and neurological examination in both upper and lower limbs
were normal. Plain radiograph of the pelvis showed bilateral central dislocation of the acetabulum (Fig. 1). Computed tomography of the
pelvis was performed and showed comminuted fracture of the anterior, posterior, and medial walls of the right acetabulum with superior and
inward displacement of the right femoral head. Also comminuted fracture of anterior-posterior column as well as superior and inward
displacement of the left acetabulum was observed. Plain radiographs of both shoulders were performed and showed both shoulder fracture
dislocation (Fig. 2, Fig. 3). Computed tomography of the right shoulder showed comminuted and posteriorly displaced fracture of the surgical
neck of humerus and the humeral head was displaced posterior–inferiorly. Computed tomography of the left shoulder showed fracture of the
spine of scapula with comminuted and posteriorly displaced fracture of the surgical neck of humerus and the humeral head was displaced
posterior–inferiorly. Patient was initially treated with a shoulder arm pouch. Hemi-arthroplasty was performed for right shoulder fracture
dislocation (Fig. 4, Fig. 6). Left humeral fracture dislocation was treated with open reduction and internal fixation with platting (Fig. 5,
Fig. 6). Bilateral central hip dislocation was treated conservatively initially with slower femoral skeletal traction. During postoperative
period, passive shoulder mobilization started for right shoulder while left shoulder was immobilized in internal rotation for 6 weeks in the
shoulder arm pouch. The patient was asked to non-weight bearing for 3 months. During skeletal traction, passive physiotherapy for lower
limbs started. Traction was interrupted at 12 postoperative week and range of movement exercises for both hips were started gradually.
Patient was reviewed at regular interval of 4 weeks during the follow-up period. His radiograph after 3 months showed an acceptable
congruity of both hip joints. He had improvement in his functions and was able to perform activities of daily living comfortably. He
sustained right intertrochanteric femur fracture following trivial fall at home 2 year after previous injury, and was treated with dynamic
hip screw fixation. At present patient had a 3 years' follow-up from his initial seizure episode (Fig. 7). Clinical suspicion of fracture
dislocation around the hip and shoulder in patients with epileptic seizures is useful to avoid delay in diagnosis and prevent its
complications. Less than one percent patients with epilepsy sustain fractures without direct traumatic events.1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Simultaneous
bilateral posterior dislocation of the shoulder is rare injury and it accounts for less than 2% of all shoulder dislocations.3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10 In 1971 Shaw et al3 postulated that convulsion leads massive contraction of muscles around the shoulder. These contractions of
muscles with adduction, internal rotation and flexion attitude of the shoulder leads to posterior dislocation. The clinical features of
posterior shoulder dislocation of the shoulder are severe pain, deformity around the shoulder joint. Plain radiograph and computed
tomography of the shoulder are useful for diagnosis and surgical planning.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 The treatment of posterior fracture
dislocation of the shoulder includes open reduction and fixation, hemi-arthroplasty and total shoulder replacement.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
Tellisi et al6 described a case of bilateral posterior fracture dislocation of the shoulder. Right shoulder fracture dislocation was treated
by closed reduction and left shoulder required open reduction and trans-fixation with Kirschners wire. We performed open reduction and
internal fixation with platting for the left shoulder and hemi-arthroplasty was performed for right shoulder fracture dislocation. The
complications of posterior fracture dislocation of the shoulder include unreduced shoulder dislocation, avascular necrosis, implant failure
and shoulder stiffness.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 Central acetabular fracture dislocation is seen following high velocity road traffic
accidents and rarely following episode of seizures.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 Rath et al16 in 1997 suggested that the mechanism of injury
around the hip joint following seizures is due to severe uncontrolled muscle contraction of proximal thigh muscle leading to strong force
towards the hip joint. Other factor includes severe osteoporosis due to old age and anti-eplietic medications can lead to acteabular
fracture and central dislocation of the hip joint following seizures episodes without direct traumatic event.1, 2, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17 Due to central acetabular dislocation, patients often present with hypovolumeic shock following profound blood loss.11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17 The management of hypovolumeic shock includes proper use of hypertonic solution, plasma expanders and blood products. Operative
treatment for central acetabular fractures dislocation includes conservative treatment with skeletal traction, open reduction with internal
fixation and total hip arthroplasty.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 Hip arthroplasty with fixation of acetabulum fracture is helpful in elderly
patients in view of high risk of avascular necrosis. To sum up, present study highlights the significance of clinical suspicion and clinico-
radiological evaluation for diagnosis of a rare injury following episode of seizures. Simultaneous fracture dislocation of all four limbs
can be treated by a holistic approach. Surgical management with open reduction and internal fixation is preferred and replacement
arthroplasty should be reserved for cases with implant failure and elderly patients. Peer review under responsibility of Daping Hospital and
the Research Institute of Surgery of the Third Military Medical University. Anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis showing bilateral
central acetabular fracture dislocation. Anteroposterior radiograph of the right shoulder showing fracture dislocation. Anteroposterior
radiograph of the left shoulder showing fracture dislocation. Anteroposterior radiograph of the right shoulder showing fracture dislocation
treated with Neer's hemiarthroplasty. Anteroposterior radiograph of the left shoulder showing fracture dislocation treated with open
reduction and internal fixation with plating. Clinical photograph showing surgical scar over both shoulder joints. Anteroposterior
radiograph of the pelvis showing right intertrochanteric fracture fixation with dynamic hip screw.
