Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 56 Final Diagnosis: Fixed-drug eruption Symptoms: — Medication: Metformin
Clinical Procedure: Discontinued metformin Specialty: Family Medicine Unusual or unexpected effect of treatment A fixed-drug eruption (FDE)
is a reaction characterized by cutaneous lesions that appear due to exposure to a particular drug. Barbiturates, carbamazepine,
sulfamethoxazole, and tetracyclines have all been associated with causation of FDEs. Although these drugs are more commonly associated with
FDEs, any introduction of a medication has the potential to result in a FDE. Metformin, a commonly used medication to improve glycemic
control, has been reported to cause dermatologic reactions in some case reports, but only a single previously documented case report
discusses the potential of metformin-associated FDE. We describe a 56-year-old woman who developed a FDE with multiple exposures to
metformin. Upon each exposure, small, round, erythematic lesions developed on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet; these lesions
resolved each time after discontinuation of metformin. According to the Naranjo scale, there is a definite association between metformin and
FDE in this case (score of 8). This report contributes to the limited documented literature on metformin-induced FDE. Clinicians should be
made aware of possible FDEs associated with this commonly used medication. In the United States, 9.3% of the population has diabetes, an
incidence that is even higher for those above the age of 45 years . In treating type 2 diabetes (T2DM), metformin is widely recommended as
first-line medication therapy due to its ability to improve markers of glycemic control, as well as its oral dosage form and safety profile.
It is commonly associated with gastrointestinal adverse effects, yet dermatologic reactions to metformin are uncommon and the literature
detailing these events and their management is sparse . Case reports of possible reactions to metformin include erythema multiforme, lichen
planus, rosacea, and pseudoporphyria . The second most common drug-induced cutaneous reactions are fixed-drug eruptions (FDEs) .
Characterized by lesions that appear in response to drug administration, FDEs recur at the same sites when a patient is re-challenged with
the same offending medication . Lesions most commonly affect the lips, palms of hands, soles of feet, and groin areas, and are often small
and well circumscribed. Barbiturates, carbamazepine, sulfamethoxazole, and tetracycline are most often associated with this type of reaction
. A case involving a 41-year-old woman implicated metformin as the cause of a FDE, which led to asymptomatic targetoid macules on the lips,
face, and arms . Although the patient’s medications were discontinued, the outcome of the case was not described and no rechallenge was
performed. Therefore, it is difficult to determine the actual cause of the FDE. Re-challenging patients with metformin after they
experienced a dermatologic reaction has been described in other reports, including cases of leukocytoclastic vasculitis and psoriasiform
drug eruption, and helped to further indicate that metformin was the probable cause . We present a patient who developed a FDE upon
initiation and rechallenge with metformin. A 56-year-old white woman, weighing 118 kilograms, with a past medical history of T2DM,
hypertension, dyslipidemia, allergic rhinitis, arteriosclerosis, and osteoporosis, reported to our ambulatory care clinic. Her medication
regimen included: aspirin 81 mg daily, metoprolol tartrate 50 mg twice daily, omega-3 fatty acid 2000 mg daily, cholecalciferol 1000 units
daily, and flaxseed oil 1000 mg daily. The patient had self-discontinued prescribed treatments for T2DM due to loss of insurance. With an
HgbA1c of 12.3%, she was started on metformin immediate release 1000 mg twice daily, insulin glargine 10 units daily, and insulin lispro
sliding scale. Additionally, she was started on pravastatin 40 mg and lisinopril 10 mg daily. One month later, lisinopril was replaced with
valsartan due to development of a cough. Approximately 2 months after starting metformin, she developed small, round, erythematic, slightly
pustular lesions on her palms and soles. The patient described the skin involvement as “lesions that would pop like a pimple and then turn
into flakey skin.” It was reported that the erythematous skin around the lesions was painful at times, particularly on the soles of her
feet. The metformin dose was reduced to 500 mg twice daily and symptoms improved. The patient continued therapy for 4 months after initial
outbreak of symptoms, before self-discontinuing due to ongoing symptoms. Upon cessation of metformin, the symptoms dissipated. Due to
worsening of blood glucose control following the discontinuation of metformin, bolus insulin doses were increased. In the following months,
liraglutide was started and titrated up to 1.8 mg daily as the insulin lispro was titrated down to less than 10 units prior to each meal. At
the same time, due to financial reasons, basal insulin was switched from insulin glargine to detemir. Nine months following the
discontinuation of metformin, the patient presented to the ambulatory care clinic requesting a rechallenge of metformin. Her motivating
factors for rechallenge were the cost of insulin and the inconvenience of multiple daily injections. Since the previous skin reaction did
not pose a health threat, and the addition of metformin could allow for the discontinuation of insulin lispro, metformin was restarted.
Metformin immediate release was slowly titrated over 6 weeks to a dose of 1000 mg twice daily. When a daily dose of 2000 mg was reached, she
experienced diarrhea and split her morning dose in half (500 mg with breakfast and 500 mg with lunch). The diarrhea resolved. She tolerated
this regimen for almost a month, when lesions appeared on her palms (Figure 1). The patient self-reduced the dose to 500 mg twice daily. The
skin involvement remained, but she wanted to continue therapy because the improvement in blood glucose allowed for the discontinuation of
bolus insulin. One month later, lesions also developed on the soles of her feet and migrated onto the dorsal side of the foot (Figure 2).
She experienced intermittent pain while walking and was bothered by the appearance. Given her previous history and the current dermatologic
symptoms, her primary care physician diagnosed her with a FDE secondary to metformin. The patient was trialed on a reduced metformin dose,
but she continued to experience a rash and pain with continued therapy. Metformin was then discontinued and the insulin regimen was
intensified to maintain adequate glycemic control. The patient is now maintained on basal insulin along with liraglutide. With each
metformin exposure, the patient denied acute illness and recent changes in use of medications, soaps, lotions, perfumes, laundry detergent,
or other topical products. No supportive care with topical or systemic agents was administered because the dermatologic findings resolved
upon discontinuation of the agent. Upon further questioning, the patient recalled a similar dermatologic drug eruption on her hands that
occurred 15 to 20 years ago, at the time of T2DM diagnosis. She was taking metformin extended release 2000 mg once daily, and, throughout
the first year of therapy, she developed a similar dermatologic reaction. She was referred to a dermatologist, who provided local steroid
injections every 2 weeks, but she does not recall a physician’s diagnosis. She elected to stop receiving steroid injections because they
were only providing partial relief. Subsequently, metformin therapy was self-discontinued, and the dermatologic involvement spontaneously
resolved. Several factors, including the temporal relationship, suggest metformin as the cause of a FDE in this patient. She experienced the
same dermatologic reaction of erythema and blistering on the palms and soles upon metformin initiation in subsequent years. In both
instances, dose reduction improved symptoms, limiting the outbreak to the palms. However, treatment discontinuation was required because the
effects became intolerable. Symptoms resolved after treatment discontinuation. Additionally, there are no other identified causes of this
clinical manifestation. Two scales were utilized to evaluate the likelihood that metformin was responsible for the FDE. The Naranjo scale
resulted in a score of 8, indicating a definite association between metformin and the FDE observed in this patient . An algorithm developed
by Kramer et al. resulted in a score of +4, which corresponds to a probable association . The difference in strength of association seen
between the 2 scales is related to a higher emphasis on the lack of previously reported cases of this reaction with metformin, a well-
studied medication. While it is unusual that new adverse reactions are identified with medications that have been available for longer
periods, it is not impossible. Furthermore, metformin has been previously implicated in other dermatologic skin reactions, including 1 case
of possible a FDE. Based on this evidence, it is likely that metformin was the responsible medication in our patient. Metformin is a
commonly prescribed oral agent used to improve glycemic control. The adverse effects of metformin are often gastrointestinal, but there have
been few reports of dermatologic reactions. To the best of our knowledge, only 1 other case report describes metformin as a possible cause
of a FDE. In this case, there is a strong association that metformin was the cause of the FDE. Given the widespread use of metformin,
clinicians should be made aware of the possibility of a FDE with this drug. We would like to thank Sabrina W. Cole, PharmD, BCPS for
assisting with the case report design and manuscript editing. Statement There are no financial obligations to be disclosed. There are no
conflicts of interest to be disclosed. Erythematous skin around the outer palm of the patient’s hand, with slightly pustular lesions. Small,
round, erythematic lesions on the sole of the foot (surrounded by dry skin).
