The clear cell/signet-ring cell variant of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is extremely rare. Its carcinogenesis has consistently
been linked to ultraviolet radiation and HPV in the literature. However, there is little definite information about the contribution of
diabetes mellitus (DM) to cSCC. A 78-year-old Chinese woman with type 2 DM presented with a mushroom-like lump in her right thigh.
Histological findings revealed that the lesion was mainly composed of clear cells and signet-ring cells. The septa of vacuoles in cytoplasm
displayed positivity for periodic acid schiff (PAS) and cytokeratins such as AE1/AE3, CK5/6, CK14, and CK19. Malignant cells did not express
CK7, CK8, CK18, CK20, p16, p53, or c-erbB-2, and the Ki-67 index was less than 5 %. We further explored the etiology of clear cell/signet-
ring cell cSCC using human papillomavirus (HPV) type-specific PCR and genotyping and confirmed that the patient was not infected with HPV.
Nucleus positivity for p63 indicated the involvement of the p53 family in the lesion. Meanwhile, the expression of fibroblast growth factor
receptor-2 (FGFR2), a downstream effector of p63, was upregulated in tumor cells. This study provides the first report on the clear
cell/signet-ring cell variant of cSCC found in the right thigh of a patient with type 2 DM. Metabolic imbalance in addition to conventional
pathogens such as UV and HPV may contribute to the development of the lesion via p63/FGFR2 axis. The clear cell/signet-ring cell morphology
has historically been considered to be a feature of mucin-producing adenocarcinoma in the literature. Primary cutaneous squamous cell
carcinomas (cSCC) with clear cell/signet-ring cell morphology are very rare and have always been reported in sun-exposed regions of the
body, such as the head and neck . The phrase “clear cell” refers to cells characterized by hydropic cytoplasm, and “signet-ring cell” is
used to describe cells characterized by eccentric nuclei that are located near the cellular border by large cytoplasmic vacuoles . Among
cutaneous carcinomas, the existence of the clear cell/signet-ring cell provides a basis for differential diagnosis, ruling out a variety of
adnexal tumors [3, 4]. The exact etiology of the clear cell/signet-ring cell variant of cSCC is largely unknown. A main pathogen for
cutaneous SCC is exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation, since more than 80 % of these tumors appear on sun-exposed parts of body . Human
papillomaviruses (HPVs) from the β genus are suspected to act as a co-carcinogen with UV. An early region of the HPV genome encodes five or
six early non-structural proteins, including E1, E2, E4, E5, E6 and E7 . The High-risk HPV proteins E6 and E7 are able to promote malignant
transformation of squamous cells by degrading the tumor suppressor p53 . The risk for developing cSCC appears to be 65–250 times higher in
immunosuppressed patients, especially organ transplant recipients (OTR) . Although the precise molecular mechanisms are still the subject of
controversy, several lines of evidence suggest a close relationship between diabetes mellitus (DM) and many tumors including those of the
pancreas, liver, and breast . Recent studies have provided substantial evidence that DM may contribute to the pathogenesis of cSCC. Primary
cSCC presenting as chronic diabetic foot ulcers has been proposed as a complication of DM . More recently, a elaborate study demonstrated
that oral SCC in DM patients was associated with poorer prognoses compared to oral SCC in non-DM patients . Furthermore, oral administration
of metformin, a traditional anti-DM drug, can significantly improve the overall survival of DM patients with head and neck cSCC . In this
study, we report the first case of cutaneous SCC with clear cell/signet-ring cell morphology found in the right thigh of a woman with type 2
DM. Immunohistochemistry and HPV type-sepcific PCR and genotyping were employed to explore the possibly underlying mechanisms. A 78-year-old
Chinese woman, gravida 2, para 2, with menopause at age 51, presented to the Department of Endocrinology with a 2-week history of
5 × 3 × 1.5 cm mushroom-like lump in her right thigh (Fig. 1a, b). According to the medical history, the patient was a housewife and
confirmed that she was not exposed to excessively professional, accidental, or medical UV radiation. She had a 30-year history of type 2 DM
and her HbA1c was 8.4 % (68mMol/mol) upon admission. There were several scars caused by chronic ulcers adjacent to the lesion (Fig. 1a). She
denied any history of neoplasms.Fig. 1Clinical and histological findings of clear cell/signet ring cell cSCC. A mushroom-like lesion in
right thigh was resected under local anesthesia (a, b). Scars caused by chronic ulcer were observed adjacent to the lesion (a, black arrow).
Clear cell/signet ring cell assembled thick trabecula and solid nest (c, original magnification × 20). Scattered signet ring cells were
observed (d, black arrow, original magnification × 400) Clinical and histological findings of clear cell/signet ring cell cSCC. A mushroom-
like lesion in right thigh was resected under local anesthesia (a, b). Scars caused by chronic ulcer were observed adjacent to the lesion
(a, black arrow). Clear cell/signet ring cell assembled thick trabecula and solid nest (c, original magnification × 20). Scattered signet
ring cells were observed (d, black arrow, original magnification × 400) The lesion was resected under local anesthesia. The sample was fixed
in 4 % buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin using conventional techniques. Serial tissue sections were studied using hematoxylin and
eosin staining, histochemistry, immunohistochemistry (Table 1), and HPV type-specific PCR and genotyping. Blind evaluation of all results
was performed by two independent pathologists.Table 1Summary of Primary Antibodies Used for
ImmunohistochemistryAntibodySupplierDilutionCytokeratinDAKO1:100Cytokeratin 5/6DAKO1:100Cytokeratin 7DAKO1:100Cytokeratin
8DAKO1:150Cytokeratin 14DAKO1:150Cytokeratin 18DAKO1:100Cytokeratin 19DAKO1:100Cytokeratin
20DAKO1:100c-erbB-2DAKO1:100P16abcam1:150P53abcam1:100P63abcam1:100FGFR2abcam1:150 Summary of Primary Antibodies Used for
Immunohistochemistry Light microscopy examination showed that the lesion was mainly composed of malignant clear cells and signet-ring cells
arranged in thick trabeculae or solid nests (Fig. 1c). The clear cells contained prominent vacuoles which were sharply demarcated and
appeared empty. Each of the signet-ring cells contained a large cytoplasmic vacuole and an eccentric nucleus (Fig. 1d). Atypical mitotic
figures were plentiful. Periodic-acid Schiff (PAS), Alcian blue (AB), and mucicarmin techniques were employed to explore the nature of the
observed clear cell/signet ring cell structures. The septa rather than the vacuoles showed positivity for PAS indicating the existence of
glycogen (Fig. 2a, b). However, neither septa nor vacuoles expressed AB or mucicarmine, suggesting that neither mucin nor
mucopolysaccharides existed (data not shown). In line with the above results, the septa expressed cytokeratin AE1/AE3, CK5/6, CK14, and CK19
(Fig. 2c-f). CK5/6 is a high molecular weight cytokeratin wihic is usually up-regulated in neoplasms of epithelial origin, including cSCC.
Although malignant cells did not express mutant p53, they displayed strong and diffuse positivity for p63, another member of the p53 family
playing an important role in normal epithelial development and differentiation (Fig. 2g, h). We also found the increased expression of
fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 (FGFR2), a downstream effector of p63 (Fig. 2i). Nucleus immunoreactivity for Ki-67 is a hallmark of
high cell proliferation. In the sections, less than 5 % of cancer cells expressed Ki-67 (Fig. 2j). Malignant cells exhibited negativity for
CK7, CK8, CK18, CK20, P16, and c-erbB-2 (data not shown).Fig. 2Histochemical and immunohistochemical profiles of clear cell/signet-ring cell
SCC. The lesion was composed of diffused clear cells/signet cells (a, original magnification × 400). The septa of clear cells/signet-ring
cells in serial sections were positive for PAS (b, original magnification × 400). They also expressed cytokeratin AE1/AE3, CK5/6, CK14, and
CK19 (c–f, original magnification × 400). The lesion did not exhibit mutations of p53 (g, original magnification × 400). P63 positivity was
detected in the nuclei of malignant cells (h, original magnification × 400). Clear cells/signet cells expressed strong-diffuse reactivity
for FGFR2, a downstream effector of p63 (i, original magnification × 400). Less than 5 % of cancer cells expressed Ki-67 (j, original
magnification × 400) Histochemical and immunohistochemical profiles of clear cell/signet-ring cell SCC. The lesion was composed of diffused
clear cells/signet cells (a, original magnification × 400). The septa of clear cells/signet-ring cells in serial sections were positive for
PAS (b, original magnification × 400). They also expressed cytokeratin AE1/AE3, CK5/6, CK14, and CK19 (c–f, original magnification × 400).
The lesion did not exhibit mutations of p53 (g, original magnification × 400). P63 positivity was detected in the nuclei of malignant cells
(h, original magnification × 400). Clear cells/signet cells expressed strong-diffuse reactivity for FGFR2, a downstream effector of p63 (i,
original magnification × 400). Less than 5 % of cancer cells expressed Ki-67 (j, original magnification × 400) DNA was extracted from FFPE
tissue sections and purified using the TIANamp FFPE DNA Kit (TIANGEN, Beijing, China). The operation was performed according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. Subsequently, HPV DNA was amplified with the L1 consensus HPV PGMY09/PGMY11 primer set as described previously .
PCR was performed with a 25 ul reaction system, which contained 1 ul (89 ng) DNA template and 0.75 ul DNA Taq polymerase. Amplification was
carried out for 40 cycles in the CFX96 TouchTM Real-Time PCR Detection System (BIO-RAD, USA). HPV genotyping was performed using the HPV
GenoArray test kit (Hybribio, Chaozhou, China), which identifies 15 high-risk HPV types (HPV type 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 53,
56, 58, 59, 66, and 68) and 6 low-risk HPV types (HPV type 6, 11, 42, 43, 44, and 81) using flow-through hybridization and gene chips. The
result of genotyping indicated that this patient was not infected with HPV (Fig. 3).Fig. 3The results of HPV type-specific PCR and
genotyping indicated that the patient was negative for infection with HPV The results of HPV type-specific PCR and genotyping indicated that
the patient was negative for infection with HPV Clear cell/signet-ring cell morphology is no longer restricted to adenocarcinoma. A set of
malignant or benign squamous cell lesions has been demonstrated to exhibit clear cell/signet-ring cell morphology. According to our
knowledge, this is the first report of the clear cell/signet-ring cell variant of cSCC in the right thigh of a patient with DM. In the
cytoplasm of clear cells/signet-ring cells, the septa of vacuoles displayed positivity for PAS and cytokeratin may be composed of
intermediate filaments. Electron microscopy revealed that most of the vacuoles contained moderate amounts of electron-dense flocculent
material, while the others are empty . Further studies demonstrate that inciting factors may promote the formation of dilated endoplasmic
reticulum, and that dilated endoplasmic reticula are among the most important components of these vacuoles . The etiology of the clear
cell/signet-ring cell variant of cSCC remains largely unknown. The role of UV radiation in the carcinogenesis of cutaneous tumors has long
been understood and reported in the literature. Chronic exposure to UV can cause cellular DNA mutations, such as the various p53 mutations,
and the accumulation of genetic abnormalities eventually leads to the formation of tumors . Previous studies showed that clear cell cSCC is
spatially distributed mainly in the head and neck (Table 2) [2, 20, 22–27]. However, the sun-exposed time of the thigh in this case was
limited, raising the possibility that other molecular mechanisms may contribute to the pathogenesis of clear cell/signet-ring cSCC.Table
2Summary of cutaneous squamous cell lesions with clear cell/signet-ring cell morphologyCaseAge/SexPathologic
DiagnosisLocationHCIHCEtiologyEMReferencepositivenegativepositivenegative169/MSRSCCforeheadN/AKreyberg
StainkeratinN/AN/AN/A11250/MSRSCCneckPAS (septum between vacuoles)Mucicarmine, PAS (vacuoles)AE1/AE3, MAK 6 Ker, Ker 903, CAM 5.2, CEA
(weak), EMA (weak), Ki-67Leu M1, S-100, HMB-45, Actin, Vimentin, SMANot doneRough ER cisternal dilatation9379/FSCCright cheekNocolloical
iron, PAScytokeratinNonot doneno stained material12482/MSCCleft templeNocolloical iron, PAScytokeratinNoNot doneno stained
material583/MSCCright earNocolloical iron, PAScytokeratinNoNot doneno stained material680/MSCCforeheadNocolloical iron, PAScytokeratinNoNot
doneno stained material787/MSCCfrontal scalpNocolloical iron, PAScytokeratinNoNot doneno stained material876/MSCCforeheadNocolloical iron,
PAScytokeratinNoNot doneno stained material984/FSRSCCupper lipNomucicarmine, PASkeratin, P63, EMANoNot doneNot done131066/FSCCsoleAB,
colloidal iron,PASAE1/AE3, EMA, CK5/6CK7, CK20, CEA, BerEP4, S100, Her2, ER, Ki-67HPV 18Not done51167/MSCCleft lateral canthusNoAB,
mucicarmine, PASCK5/6, p63, EMACK7, Ck20, CEANot doneNot done21283/MSRSCCback of fingerNoMucicarmine, PASNoCK20, CEA, vimentin, HMB45, Melan
A, desminnot donenot done141362/MCCSCCleft side of faceNoPAS mucicarmine, ABAE1/AE3NoN/AN/A151478/FCC/SRSCCright thighPASN/AAE1/AE3, CK5/6,
CK14, CK19, p63, FGFR2CK7, CK8, CK18, CK20, P16, HER-2, p53, Ki-67No HPV infectionNot donepresent study HC histochemistry; IHC
immunohistochemistry; EM electron microscopy; SCC squamous cell carcinoma; SRSCC signet ring cell squamous cell carcinoma; CCSCC clear cell
squamous cell carcinoma; CC/SRSCC clear cell/signet ring cell squamous cell carcinoma; PAS periodic-acid Schiff; CCS clear cell sarcoma;
MiTF microphthalmia transcription factor; CCSCC clear cell/signet ring cell squamous cell carcinoma Summary of cutaneous squamous cell
lesions with clear cell/signet-ring cell morphology HC histochemistry; IHC immunohistochemistry; EM electron microscopy; SCC squamous cell
carcinoma; SRSCC signet ring cell squamous cell carcinoma; CCSCC clear cell squamous cell carcinoma; CC/SRSCC clear cell/signet ring cell
squamous cell carcinoma; PAS periodic-acid Schiff; CCS clear cell sarcoma; MiTF microphthalmia transcription factor; CCSCC clear cell/signet
ring cell squamous cell carcinoma The particularly strong association between HPV, especially high-risk varieties of HPV, and the
carcinogenesis of cSCC has been confirmed . HPV proteins E6 and E7 can promote the malignant transformation of tumor cells through their
interaction with the p53 protein and RB-susceptibility gene product (Rb). P53 is a transcriptional factor that plays a critical role in the
regulation of the cell cycle, DNA repair, and apoptosis. HPV can enhance the activity of the ubiquitin pathway and promote the degradation
of p53, this is a common event in the initial stages of many malignant tumors . Although p53 expression was not observed in malignant clear
cells/signet-ring cells in this case, we did not detect any HPV infection in this patient, which suggests that it is possible that different
etiologic mechanisms exist. However, immunohistochemistry in this case confirmed the up-regulation of p63, another member of the p53 family
contributing to the proliferative potential of epidermal progenitor cells . TAp63 isoforms have an effect on the commitment to
stratification, while ΔNp63 isoforms regulate the epidermal morphogenesis at a later stage . ΔNp63 not only directly competes with other
members of the p53 family in the inhibition of consequent signaling pathways, but also regulates the transcription of several genes involved
in tumoreigenesis, such as IRF6, IKKα and FGFR2 (Fig. 4) .Fig. 4Hypothesis regarding the involvement of type 2 DM in the pathogenesis of
cSCC. Epidemiological studies suggest that hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and immune disorders in patients with type 2 DM increase the
risk of malignant transformation. DM-related chronic ulcer is proposed as a precancerous lesion. Type 2 DM can enhance the expression of
p63, which in turn activate the downstream element FGFR2. It may also increase the secretion of FGF7 in stromal cells and affect FGFR2
through paracrine stimulates. Indirect evidence indicates that PI3K/AKT signaling may be involved and contribute to the malignant
transformation of squamous cell Hypothesis regarding the involvement of type 2 DM in the pathogenesis of cSCC. Epidemiological studies
suggest that hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and immune disorders in patients with type 2 DM increase the risk of malignant transformation.
DM-related chronic ulcer is proposed as a precancerous lesion. Type 2 DM can enhance the expression of p63, which in turn activate the
downstream element FGFR2. It may also increase the secretion of FGF7 in stromal cells and affect FGFR2 through paracrine stimulates.
Indirect evidence indicates that PI3K/AKT signaling may be involved and contribute to the malignant transformation of squamous cell
Accumulating evidence supports the hypothesis that DM, in addition to UV radiation and HPV infection, may be involved in the carcinogenesis
of cSCC. Patients with DM have an increased susceptibility to infections and typically exhibit chronic ulcers in the lower extremities.
Cases of cutaneous SCC arising in long-standing foot ulcer of diabetic patients have been reported . In this study, the clear cell/signet-
ring cell variant of cSCC also exhibited a close spatial and temporal relationship with adjacent scars caused by a chronic ulcer.
Substantial research further demonstrates that DM patients with oral SCC at advanced stages tended to have a lower overall survival and a
higher recurrence rate compared to nondiabetic patients . Epidemiological studies consistently produce results that metformin, a first-line
drug for type 2 DM, can significantly reduce the risk of many cancers. Metformin monotherapy is associated with lower risk of breast and
gastrointestinal cancers compared to treatment with sulfonylurea (SU) derivatives, insulin or a combined SU and metformin treatment [33,
34]. It can also significantly improve the overall survival rate of patients with head and neck cSCC . Several hypotheses emerge regarding
the underlying molecular mechanisms. One study suggested that FGFR2, a downstream effector of p63, may contribute to the progression from
squamous cell dysplasia to cSCC . Our study supports this view since clear cells/signet-ring cells exhibited strong-diffuse positivity for
FGFR2 (Fig. 4). It is worth noting that, in contrast to our findings, an elaborate study took advantage of an established type 1 diabetic
rat model to demonstrate that up-regulated erb-B2 and erb-B3 promoted cell proliferation and inhibited apoptosis . However, species, type of
diabetes, and exact cSCC region may explain these different conclusions. cSCC tumors with clear cell/signet ring cell morphology are
extremely rare, and occur mainly in sun-exposed regions of the body such as the head and neck. We reported our analysis of the first known
case of clear cell/signet ring cell cSCC in the right thigh of a woman with type 2 DM. Results of PAS and cytokeratin staining suggested
that the septa of cytoplasmic vacuoles in cancer cells were composed of intermediate filaments. The negative result of the HPV type-specific
PCR and genotyping indicated that HPV did not affect the malignant transformation of the lesion in this case. Although we have provided
preliminary evidence that DM may be involved in the development of clear cell/signet ring cell cSCC via the p63/FGFR2 axis, further research
will be required to determine the exact molecular mechanisms involved. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. alcian blue cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma diabetes mellitus fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 human papillomavirus organ
transplant recipients periodic acid Schiff squamous cell carcinoma sulfonylurea ultraviolet Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contribution WNR, WMM and ZL carried out the immunohistochemical studies, participated in the
sequence alignment and drafted the manuscript. LZL, CNP, HJP and DYJ carried out the histochemical studies. QXQ, HXF, SY, ZSY, TF, ZY, LQ
and ZZY collected clinical data and participated in the histology analysis. WNR participated in the design of the study and performed the
statistical analysis. DH conceived of the study, and participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 81300347), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province, China (No. 20132BAB205037, 20151BAB215008, 20151BBG70200), and
Foundation of Jiangxi Educational Committee (No. GJJ14192), Foundation of Health and Family Planning Commission of Jiangxi Province (No.
20155592, 20155103, 20161086, 20161093).
