Navicular bone partition is a rare condition reported in horses, which is during the evaluation of a lameness or prepurchase examination
often misinterpreted for a parasagittal fracture. In this report, the clinicopathological findings of three cases of navicular bone
partition are evaluated. The possible pathomechanisms underlying the condition are hypothesised, focusing on a potential origin of foetal
vascular disturbance. This study is furthermore aiming at a clearer and earlier recognition of navicular bone partition, since this
condition would finally predispose for a clinical lameness with a poor prognosis. Case 1 was a 10-year-old Belgian Warmblood gelding with a
Grade 3/5 chronic, recurrent left-forelimb lameness that had persisted for 4 months. Perineural palmar digital nerve block of the distal
foot abolished the lameness. Radiographic examination revealed a bipartite navicular bone in the left forelimb. Unfortunately, the animal
was lost to follow-up. Case 2 was a 7-year-old Quarter Horse stallion with a Grade 3/5 recurrent right forelimb lameness that had persisted
for 2 years. The lameness switched to the contralateral left forelimb with a palmar digital nerve block. Radiographic examination identified
a tripartite navicular bone in both forelimbs. Pathological examination additionally revealed chronic degenerative changes of the cartilage
and subchondral bone with marked cystic changes. Case 3 was a 5-year-old Dutch Warmblood gelding with a Grade 3/5 recurrent left hindlimb
lameness that had persisted for 6 months. Owing to the uncooperative behaviour of the horse, only a combined peroneal and tibial nerve block
could be performed, which abolished the lameness. Radiographic examination revealed a bipartite navicular bone in the left hindlimb.
Pathological examination showed a navicular bipartition in the left hindlimb, with microscopic changes comparable to those evident in Case
2; additionally, cartilage indentations were also found in the navicular bones of the right front- and hindlimb at a similar location as the
partition site in the left hindlimb. It is speculated that a navicular bone partition has a congenital origin and is caused by vascular
disturbance during foetal development. This may lead to aberrant endochondral ossification or the formation of multiple ossification centres
resulting in navicular bone partitioning. In the adult horse, chronic repetitive biomechanical challenges at the partition sites may induce
local degenerative changes with subchondral cyst formation and thus would cause a gradually developing chronic lameness with a poor
prognosis. Bi- or tripartite development of the navicular bone is a rare condition in horses that is often a coincidental finding during the
evaluation of lameness or at a prepurchase examination [3, 9, 15, 22]. Early recognition of the condition and distinction from its main
differential diagnosis, a parasagittal fracture, is essential. Misinterpretation of radiographs can lead to disputes between the vendor,
buyer, veterinarian and/or insurance company. The clinical appearance of navicular bone partition usually is a mild lameness, but affected
horses may initially exhibit normal athletic function . Its radiographic findings are characterized by rounded bone edges of the adjacent
pieces of navicular bone, a wide radiolucent region at the partition site and often cystic development of adjacent subchondral bone, which
are in contrast with the usual characteristics of a fracture [4, 5, 8, 9, 15, 18]. The veterinary literature on navicular bone partition is
limited and pathological examination of the partite navicular bone has rarely been performed . In the human literature, the condition has
been reported more frequently, but to date it is merely considered a relatively uncommon anatomical variation . Possible pathomechanisms
underlying this condition mentioned, include the formation of multiple ossification centres and/or a disturbance in the blood supply,
leading to incomplete ossification of the cartilaginous bone model [10, 11, 19]. In this article, the clinical, radiological and
pathological examination of 3 horses with navicular bone partition will be presented and possible underlying pathogenetic mechanisms are
discussed with a review of the existing relevant literature. Between 2008 and 2011, two adult Warmblood horses and one Quarter Horse were
referred to the Equine Clinic of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine at Utrecht University, The Netherlands, for the evaluation of a chronic,
recurrent lameness of the left forelimb (LF), right forelimb (RF) and left hindlimb (LH), respectively. All horses were clinically evaluated
i.e. the lameness was scored on a hard ground surface at trot on a straight line and on the lunge according to a modified AAEP lameness
scale (Grade 0–5, separately for walk and trot). Palpation and percussion of the lame- and contralateral limb was performed and a flexion
test of the distal limbs was scored as positive or negative. Local perineural analgesia was used to block the lameness and evaluated after
5–10 min. In two horses (Case 1 and 2) the lameness was blocked after a perineural analgesia of the distal foot using a palmar digital nerve
(PDN) block. The third horse (Case 3) became sound after a peroneal and tibial nerve block. Bilateral radiographic evaluation of the
navicular bone consisted of a dorsoproximal-palmarodistal oblique view, a lateromedial view and, if possible, a palmaro 45 ° proximal-
palmarodistal oblique view. All three horses were diagnosed with a bi- or tripartite navicular bone in the lame limb; in one horse (Case 2)
the condition was bilateral. Two horses (Cases 2 and 3) were euthanized because of the chronicity of the lameness and their poor prognosis,
allowing a subsequent pathological examination (of both front feet in Case 2 and all four feet in Case 3). Case 1 was unavailable for
follow-up. A 10-year-old Belgian Warmblood gelding presented with recurrent LF lameness of gradual onset that had persisted for
approximately 4 months. Clinical examination revealed a Grade 3/5 LF lameness on a straight line that became more severe on the left hand
lunge. Palpation of the palmar aspect of the foot and percussion of the frog identified no abnormalities. The horse exhibited a positive
response to a flexion test of the left distal forelimb and no response at the right distal forelimb. The lameness was abolished by a PDN
block of the LF limb. Radiographic examination of the LF in dorsopalmar view revealed bipartition of the navicular bone at the lateral wing
with rounded adjacent edges. There was no clear formation of osteophytes and the distal border of the navicular bone had some small lucent
zones. The lateral trabecular part of the navicular bone, however, showed several well-defined, radiolucent cystic areas adjacent to the
radiolucent line (Fig. 1a). In the RF, in a similar dorsopalmar view of the navicular bone, a few radiolucent zones were visible on the
distal border but there were no indications of partitioning or cystic development (Fig. 1b).Fig. 1Case 1. Radiographic examination of a
horse, dorsoproximal-palmarodistal oblique view. a Bipartite navicular bone conformation in the left forelimb. b Normal navicular bone
conformation in the right forelimb Case 1. Radiographic examination of a horse, dorsoproximal-palmarodistal oblique view. a Bipartite
navicular bone conformation in the left forelimb. b Normal navicular bone conformation in the right forelimb After the horse was diagnosed
with a unilateral, bipartite navicular bone of the LF, the owner initially decided to further evaluate the use of the horse for hunting
using orthopaedic shoeing, but finally the horse was lost to follow-up. A 7-year-old Quarter Horse stallion presented with a recurrent RF
lameness of gradual onset that had persisted for over 2 years. Clinical examination revealed a Grade 3/5 RF lameness comparable lame on both
a straight line and on the right hand lunge. Palpation of the palmar pastern region of the RF elicited a mild pain response as-well as
percussion of the frog. The horse exhibited a (slightly) positive response to a flexion test of the right forelimb and no response to the
left forelimb. Using a PDN block of the distal RF the lameness switched to the LF limb. Radiographic examination of both distal forelimbs in
dorsopalmar view revealed that both navicular bones had extensive disseminated irregular radiolucent areas in the lateral and medial wings.
The radiolucent lines, located at more or less one third of their length in the navicular bones, showed rounded corners at the proximal and
distal edges. Both forefeet were diagnosed with a tripartite navicular bone (Fig. 2a, b). Due to the long history of lameness and poor
prognosis, the horse was euthanized and both distal forelimbs became available for pathological examination.Fig. 2Case 2. Radiographic
examination of a horse, dorsoproximal-palmarodistal oblique view with a tripartite navicular bone conformation in both forelimbs. a Right
forelimb. b Left forelimb Case 2. Radiographic examination of a horse, dorsoproximal-palmarodistal oblique view with a tripartite navicular
bone conformation in both forelimbs. a Right forelimb. b Left forelimb Pathological examination of the navicular bones of the RF and LF
revealed similar abnormalities. Macroscopically, both bones appeared to be composed of three similar-sized pieces of bone, connected by
small amounts of irregular slightly protruding pale yellow-brown to red fibrillar tissue, resulting in marked irregularity of the articular
surface of the navicular bone to the middle phalanx at these connection sites. The cartilage of the middle third part of the bone lying in
between these sites showed marked smooth indentation. On the transverse cut surface in the middle of the navicular bone, the connection
sites consisted of fibrous tissue. Directly adjacent to these connection sites, the subchondral bone contained several variably-sized and
sharply-demarcated grey-brown to white cystic areas. The synovial lining of the coffin joint and the adherent deep digital flexor tendon
were slightly irregular, with yellow and red discoloration. The articular surfaces of the middle and distal phalanx of both coffin joints
appeared smooth. Both coffin joints contained normal amounts of slightly viscous and slightly yellow synovial fluid (Fig. 3a). The
transverse cut surface of the LF navicular bone was examined histopathomorphologically after fixation in 4 % formalin, decalcification,
paraffin-embedding, sectioning at 4 μm, and Haematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining (Fig. 3b). The bone showed a continuous smooth lining of
articular cartilage, deviating into the bone at the partition sites and culminating in extensive accumulations of fibrocartilaginous tissue
in the centre of these sites. The adjacent articular cartilage at the coffin joint surface showed multifocal, irregular thickening and a
tendency for mild chondrocyte clustering (chondrone formation). The adjacent subchondral bone appeared markedly sclerotic. The cystic
lesions (lateral side of the middle third piece and the medial side of the lateral third piece) consisted of concentrically-layered
accumulations of partly densely-arranged, moderately-cellular and highly-vascularized connective tissue and partly loosely-arranged myxoid-
like connective tissue; no clear synovial epithelial lining was evident in the cysts. There were no signs of active inflammation or
osteonecrosis. The macroscopically-described fibrillar tissue protruding at the partitions’ connection site surfaces could histologically
not be traced back (Fig. 4).Fig. 3 a Case 2. Macroscopic pathological findings of the LF (A) and RF (B) navicular bones (panels 1: distal
interphalangeal joint articular surface, panels 2: transverse cut surface, formalin-fixed). Both navicular bones consist of three
approximately same-sized bony pieces connected by fibrillary tissue. On the transverse cut surface of both bones, round variable-sized well-
demarcated cystic structures can be appreciated near the connection sites. The articular surface is markedly irregular. L?=?lateral side,
M?=?medial side. b Case 2. Transverse section of the navicular bones was made as shown in panel B (red lines), resulting in a front part A
and a back part B. The Fig. 3: A2 and B2 are the front parts A of the bones after making the transverse sections and rotated 180°, as shown
in panels C and D. The cystic change as situated in Fig. 3a: A2 is shown here as a white circle (asterisk); L?=?lateral; M?=?medialFig.
4Combined histopathomorphological findings of Case 2 and 3, Haematoxylin and Eosin (H&E). A continuous smooth lining of cartilage, deviating
into the bone at the partition’s connection site (bar = 1 mm). B cystic change of the subchondral bone with marked sclerosis of the adjacent
bone (arrows) (bar = 1 mm). C retained cartilage cores (black arrows) at a connection site of one of the partitions near the outer
concentric layer of a subchondral bone cyst (white arrows) (bar = 500 μm). D densely-packed highly vascular aspect of cysts, with adjacent
sclerotic bone (arrow) (bar = 200 μm). E myxoid-like aspect of the cysts, surrounded by more densely-packed fibrous tissue (arrows)
(bar = 100 μm). F island of tissue in the fibrous cystic wall resembling synovial membrane (arrows) (bar = 200 μm). G chondrone formation in
the articular cartilage (bar = 100 μm). H fibrocartilaginous tissue at the partition’s connection sites (bar = 100 μm). B, C, D, E, G and H
Case 2, LF navicular bone. A and F: Case 3, LH navicular bone; * = tissue processing artefacts a Case 2. Macroscopic pathological findings
of the LF (A) and RF (B) navicular bones (panels 1: distal interphalangeal joint articular surface, panels 2: transverse cut surface,
formalin-fixed). Both navicular bones consist of three approximately same-sized bony pieces connected by fibrillary tissue. On the
transverse cut surface of both bones, round variable-sized well-demarcated cystic structures can be appreciated near the connection sites.
The articular surface is markedly irregular. L?=?lateral side, M?=?medial side. b Case 2. Transverse section of the navicular bones was made
as shown in panel B (red lines), resulting in a front part A and a back part B. The Fig. 3: A2 and B2 are the front parts A of the bones
after making the transverse sections and rotated 180°, as shown in panels C and D. The cystic change as situated in Fig. 3a: A2 is shown
here as a white circle (asterisk); L?=?lateral; M?=?medial Combined histopathomorphological findings of Case 2 and 3, Haematoxylin and Eosin
(H&E). A continuous smooth lining of cartilage, deviating into the bone at the partition’s connection site (bar = 1 mm). B cystic change of
the subchondral bone with marked sclerosis of the adjacent bone (arrows) (bar = 1 mm). C retained cartilage cores (black arrows) at a
connection site of one of the partitions near the outer concentric layer of a subchondral bone cyst (white arrows) (bar = 500 μm). D
densely-packed highly vascular aspect of cysts, with adjacent sclerotic bone (arrow) (bar = 200 μm). E myxoid-like aspect of the cysts,
surrounded by more densely-packed fibrous tissue (arrows) (bar = 100 μm). F island of tissue in the fibrous cystic wall resembling synovial
membrane (arrows) (bar = 200 μm). G chondrone formation in the articular cartilage (bar = 100 μm). H fibrocartilaginous tissue at the
partition’s connection sites (bar = 100 μm). B, C, D, E, G and H Case 2, LF navicular bone. A and F: Case 3, LH navicular bone; * = tissue
processing artefacts A 5-year-old Dutch Warmblood gelding presented with recurrent LH lameness of gradual onset that had persisted for more
than 6 months. Clinical examination revealed a Grade 3/5 LH lameness on a straight line and on the left hand lunge. Palpation of the palmar
aspect of the foot and percussion of the frog identified no abnormalities. Owing to its dangerous, uncooperative behaviour, a flexion test
and PDN block of the distal hindlimb could not be performed. Finally, a peroneal and tibial nerve block was performed on the lame LH, by
which the lameness of the horse became abolished. Routine radiographs were made of the left hock and the left distal limb. After the horse
was diagnosed with a LH bipartite navicular bone the contralateral navicular bone was also radiographically evaluated. Radiographic
examination of the LH revealed a wide, radiolucent line in the lateral wing of the navicular bone at one-third of its total length in a
parasagittal plane, with rounded margins of the two osseous pieces and cystic changes in the adjacent subchondral bone, together indicative
of bipartition; there were no clear findings consistent with degenerative joint disease (Fig. 5a). Further radiographic evaluation of the LH
(fetlock and talocrural joint) and right hindlimb (RH) navicular bone (Fig. 5b) revealed no abnormalities. Due to the duration of the
lameness, the depressed character change of the horse possibly due to the persistent pain, and the given poor prognosis, the horse was
euthanized and a pathological examination was performed on all four feet.Fig. 5Case 3. Radiographic examination of a horse, dorsoproximal-
palmarodistal oblique view. a Bipartite navicular bone confirmation in the left hindlimb. b Normal navicular bone confirmation in the right
hindlimb Case 3. Radiographic examination of a horse, dorsoproximal-palmarodistal oblique view. a Bipartite navicular bone confirmation in
the left hindlimb. b Normal navicular bone confirmation in the right hindlimb Macroscopically, the LH navicular bone seemed to consist of
two partly joined pieces with a clear sagittal indentation at the lateral side at one-third of its length, possessing smooth cartilaginous
edges and causing marked focal irregularity of the articular surface to the middle phalanx. Contrasting with the partition sites in Case 2,
the articular surface at this location did not contain any protruding irregular fibrillar tissue. On the transverse cut surface, adjacent to
the edges of both bone parts, round variably-sized and sharply-demarcated white to grey-brown cystic structures were visible in the
subchondral and trabecular bone. The RH and RF navicular bones showed only mild indentations in the lateral and the medial wings
respectively of the articular cartilage at approximately one-third of the total length. The navicular bone of the LF appeared unremarkable.
The articular surfaces of the middle and distal phalanx of all coffin joints were smooth. As described for Case 2, all coffin joints
contained normal amounts of slightly viscous and slightly yellow synovial fluid (Fig. 6).Fig. 6Case 3. Macroscopic pathological findings of
the RF (A), LF (B), RH (C) and LH (D) navicular bones (panels 1: coffin joint articular surface, panels 2: transverse cut surface, formalin-
fixed). The LH navicular bone shows marked sagittal indentation at its articular surface at the lateral side at one third of its length. On
the transverse cut surface, cystic structures resembling those described in Case 2 can be appreciated at both sides of the connection site.
The RF and RH navicular bones show only mild superficial sagittal indentation of the articular cartilage (picture insets), without changes
of the subchondral bone; L = lateral side, M = medial side Case 3. Macroscopic pathological findings of the RF (A), LF (B), RH (C) and LH
(D) navicular bones (panels 1: coffin joint articular surface, panels 2: transverse cut surface, formalin-fixed). The LH navicular bone
shows marked sagittal indentation at its articular surface at the lateral side at one third of its length. On the transverse cut surface,
cystic structures resembling those described in Case 2 can be appreciated at both sides of the connection site. The RF and RH navicular
bones show only mild superficial sagittal indentation of the articular cartilage (picture insets), without changes of the subchondral bone;
L = lateral side, M = medial side Histopathomorphologic examination of the LH navicular bone (fixation, decalcification, paraffin-embedding,
slide thickness and staining identical to Case 2 revealed changes similar, though milder, to those in Case 2. There was mild irregular
thickening of the otherwise continuous smooth lining of the cartilage, which deviated, similarly to Case 2, into the bone at the partition
site. At this location, the navicular bone showed a similar accumulation of fibrocartilaginous tissue, few retained cartilage cores and
sclerosis of the adjacent trabecular bone. Cystic lesions were of the same composition as in Case 2 and contained focally in the outer
concentric layers near the connection site small tissue pieces resembling synovial lining (Fig. 4). In both human medical and veterinary
literature, navicular (distal sesamoid) bone partition is considered to be congenital [2–4, 11, 15, 21, 22]. In human medical literature,
the most frequently suggested pathogenesis underlying sesamoid partition would involve the formation of multiple ossification centres within
a single cartilage bone model, which fail to fuse [10, 11, 19], or the formation of extra aberrant ossification centres in addition to the
normally present single cartilage bone model . Regarding these hypothetic pathogenetic mechanisms, repetitive vascular micro-trauma has been
cited as an important aetiological factor, as it interferes with the ossification process by impairing blood, and therefore oxygen and
nutrient, supply. Typical features of a partitioned navicular bone, distinguishing it from parasagittal fractures, provided by this study
are:a chronic, persistent lameness, often with a gradual onset;a correlation between relatively mild lameness and overt radiographic
findings in the same limb(s);the possibility of multiple limbs involved;no substantial peri-articular remodelling;a uniform distribution of
partition sites at approximately one-third of the length of the navicular bone; anda continuous, smooth lining of articular cartilage that
deviates into the bone at the partition site. a chronic, persistent lameness, often with a gradual onset; a correlation between relatively
mild lameness and overt radiographic findings in the same limb(s); the possibility of multiple limbs involved; no substantial peri-articular
remodelling; a uniform distribution of partition sites at approximately one-third of the length of the navicular bone; and a continuous,
smooth lining of articular cartilage that deviates into the bone at the partition site. Aetiologically, especially the last two
characteristics, being rather distinctive anatomical features, seem to plead for abnormal congenital development of the involved navicular
bones. The uniform distribution of the partition sites seen in all cases, notably in the case of tripartition when two partitions exist in
the same bone evenly-spread along its total length simultaneously, is difficult to consider as being the result of a coincidental traumatic
event leading to fractures. In addition, even if such simultaneous evenly-spread parallel fractures would be able to occur, clinical
presentation would likely be very different with marked acute lameness dominating. Moreover, regarding the normal features of fracture
repair and the normal regenerative properties of bone and cartilage, it is hardly thinkable that an uncomplicated smooth cartilaginous
lining as seen at the partition sites in the described cases would develop at a site of a fracture. Whether the partitioning of distal or
proximal sesamoid bones is a hereditary defect, is not that clear yet and beyond the scope of the findings presented in this study. In
veterinary literature a ‘multiple ossification centre hypothesis’ is suggested as a possible pathomechanism underlying partitioning [3, 4,
8, 9]. Some authors otherwise regard this sesamoid bone partitioning as a mild form of polydactyly [2, 21]. If navicular bone partitioning
is an expression of polydactyly, however, one might expect further partitioning of also of the more proximal bones and surrounding
structures (e.g. tendons) distal to the involved navicular bone. The authors of this paper found no evidence of this in their case series
and can therefore would rather not support polydactyly as the underlying mechanism of navicular bone partition. During fetal development,
the blood supply to the navicular bone takes two routes from day 125 of gestation . One supply is temporarily situated in the superficial
layer of the fibrocartilage; the other supply is the one becoming permanent in the adult horse , in which arteries enter the navicular bone
from four different directions (Fig. 7a). The temporary secondary circulation gradually disappears after 270 days of gestation when the
first ossification centres appear. A disruption of either of these vascular networks might trigger aberrant ossification, although the
temporary vessels are less likely to be of influence as they do not penetrate the navicular bone itself. Vascular micro-trauma or intra-
articular blood vessel compression due to e.g. unusual positioning of the foetus in utero may lead to hypoxia and result in defective
endochondral ossification, eventually causing partitioning of the navicular bone. In a similar way, regarding the pathogenesis of
osteochondrosis during bone and joint growth, failure of the blood supply is considered responsible for the defective transformation of
cartilage into bone [13, 14, 23]. In a study of foals [13, 14], early lesions of osteochondrosis in the distal tibia occurred secondary to
failure of the blood supply of the physeal plate, leading to ischaemic necrosis and locally preventing normal ossification. Moreover,
osteochondrotic lesions are formed in a limited time window, namely the period when the epiphyseal cartilage is supplied by vulnerable blood
vessels . Our hypothesis is based on the same idea that disturbance at a specific moment during gestation, when angiogenesis in the
cartilage navicular bone model occurs , can initiate the partitioning process.Fig. 7 a Schematic drawings of the arterial supply of the
navicular bone (modified with permission from Rijkenhuizen et al. ). Arteries entering from four different directions illustrated in
colours. b Diagram of the suggested arterial anatomy of the navicular bone (modified with permission from Rijkenhuizen et al. ). The red
coloured areas indicate the parts of the navicular bone that receive arteries from only one direction. The light green coloured areas
receive arteries from two directions and the dark green coloured areas from three directions a Schematic drawings of the arterial supply of
the navicular bone (modified with permission from Rijkenhuizen et al. ). Arteries entering from four different directions illustrated in
colours. b Diagram of the suggested arterial anatomy of the navicular bone (modified with permission from Rijkenhuizen et al. ). The red
coloured areas indicate the parts of the navicular bone that receive arteries from only one direction. The light green coloured areas
receive arteries from two directions and the dark green coloured areas from three directions Partitions of the navicular bone seem to be
consistently located at approximately one-third of the length of the bone in the parasagittal plane in the lateral and/or medial wing.
Certain parts of the navicular bone receive arteries from only one side, whereas other parts receive arteries from more than one direction
[16, 17]. The parts supplied by only one artery are likely more susceptible to ischemia due to vascular disturbance, which during foetal
development might predispose these areas for partitioning (Fig. 7b). The histological changes found at partition sites can be briefly
summarized as features of degeneration. A suitable explanation for these changes is that the partition sites are subjected to abnormal
pressure through micro-movement of the bone segments during life [6, 12], again (as with the hypothesized pathogenesis of the partitioning
process in utero) compromising local circulation and leading to ischaemic necrosis. Within the rather non-specific spectrum of degenerative
lesions of bone, subchondral cysts are chronic lesions that likely develop from necrotic cartilaginous fragments retained in the subchondral
bone, focal necrosis of the subchondral bone itself or as a result of synovial fluid being forced into the subchondral bone via defects in
the articular cartilage . This is seen as a sequel of osteochondrosis , in the course of navicular disease and also after trauma to the
articular surface [1, 20]. It is unclear whether the cysts in the presented cases have been formed via necrotic retained cartilaginous
fragments (which are a finding in Case 3) or from the subchondral bone itself. Nevertheless, because of their known gradual development
during various chronic joint disease, subchondral cysts are more likely to co-occur with partitioning and its subsequent degenerative
features than with an acutely occurring fracture; therefore, they might be of differential diagnostic significance during radiological
examination. In our case series there was a clear age difference (5-7-10 years) in occurrence of clinical and radiological symptoms, which
is consistent with other reported cases [2, 3, 18]. All horses had similar workload and were regularly ridden; only one horse had a history
of sliding in the pasture. Apparently, the onset of specific clinical and radiological features is not directly age-related, but indirectly
related to the severity of the joint pressure imbalances and therefore subsequently the amount of time needed for the bone parts to develop
the described degenerative features presumably as a result of these imbalances. In summary, when we compare our case findings, the final
lameness in the partitioned navicular bone seems to be mainly linked to bone degeneration with cystic changes. Case 1 showed cyst-like
abnormalities during radiographic examination in only the lame limb; in this case, lameness was abolished after a PDN block. In Case 2, the
involved horse showed cystic changes in the navicular bones of both front legs; the horse became lame in the contralateral limb after PDN
block. In Case 3, after the lame limb was blocked (unfortunately the diagnosis could not definitively be confirmed by a PDN block), lameness
did not switch to the contralateral limb, which is in accordance with the radiological and pathological appearance of the bone, showing no
overt abnormalities. Navicular bone partitioning likely has a congenital origin and can possibly be explained as the result of articular
vascular disturbance in utero, causing bone abnormalities during foetal bone formation by endochondral ossification. Its clinical appearance
is a relatively mild lameness of gradual onset. The partitioning of the bone is already overt at birth and moreover due to the biomechanical
challenges at the partioning site during life this induces a progressing focal (cystic) degeneration of the navicular bone causing a
gradually developing lameness. The cysts and other characteristic radiographic findings, which include the presence of two or three clearly
separate pieces at approximately one-third of the length of the bone with rounded margins and minimal peri-articular remodelling, are
important features distinguishing navicular bone partitioning from its main differential diagnosis, the parasagittal fracture. The horses
described in this study already showed clinical signs consistent with the abnormal radiographs and pathological findings. They seem to have
exhibited the chronic stage of the disease, mainly reflecting secondary degenerative processes. Detection of the partitioning process
earlier in life may result in a better understanding of the progression of this condition, thus leading to a better insight in the disease.
Earlier recognition by the veterinarian might prevent occurrence of prepurchase issues and furthermore save time and money otherwise
becoming invested in horses suffering from an abnormality with finally a poor prognosis. In all admitted cases their owners gave their
written informed consent to participate by means of signing our official client acceptance form. In all admitted cases their owners gave
their written informed consent for publication by means of signing our official client acceptance form. The data supporting our findings are
contained within the manuscript. left forelimb left hindlimb palmar digital nerve right forelimb right hindlimb Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions EZ coordinated the case report and reviewed the literature; WB
and AJB contributed to the diagnostic work-up; EW conducted post-mortem examinations; all authors contributed to writing the manuscript and
read and approved the final manuscript. Professor Astrid B.M. Rijkenhuizen is acknowledged for her suggestions and critically reading the
manuscript. There was a kind funding in time from Veterinary Clinic De Delta, The Netherlands for E.J. van der Zaag, from the Department of
Pathobiology, division Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, The Netherlands for E.A.W.S.Weerts, from the
Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, The Netherlands for A.J.M. van den
Belt, and finally the Department of Equine Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, The Netherlands, and the Department
of Surgery and Anaesthesia of Domestic Animals, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium, both for W. Back.
