We report a rare case of an unstable flexion-distraction spine fracture with ligament involvement that occurred during a professional female
soccer game. There were no neurological déficit. The patient had a painful midline gap which suggested ligamentar injury that was not
immediately recognized. Despite that, proper immobilization and referral to hospital for further evaluation avoided additional spinal cord
damage. The patient underwent a monosegmental posterior instrumentation spine fusion and after 6 months returned to professional soccer
activities. This paper alerts to the possibility of occurrence of severe and unstable spine injuries during soccer practice and the
importance of an adequate initial care at the game field in order to avoid iatrogenic neurological injuries. Spine fractures may occur in
collision athletes. In this population, most fractures are compressive, primarily affect the cervical spine and are mechanically stable.
Flexion-distraction injuries, also known as Chance fractures, are classically caused by high-energy traumas, such as motor vehicle accidents
and falls. These fractures are potentially unstable and often related with neurological déficits. To warn of the possibility of occurrence
of unstable fractures during soccer practice and the management of these injuries in professional athletes. A 23 year-old female
professional soccer player (JQC) had a spine trauma after colliding with an opponent player while jumping. She reported that her opponent
jumped higher than her and fell down on her back, which forced her torso in flexion. Immediately after the trauma, the patient had intense
pain in the back and was unable to continue playing. There was no pain radiation to lower limbs, numbness or loss of strength. She was
immobilized with cervical collar on a spine board and then referred for urgent medical evaluation at a nearby hospital. Physical examination
revealed a dorsal midline painful gap and edema on the topography of thoracolumbar transition, but with no neurological impairment. Computed
tomography scan revealed a T12 fracture and increased space between T11-T12 spinous processes (Figure 1). Because of the suspicion of a
posterior ligament complex injury, a magnetic resonance imaging was done, and it revealed a complete T11-T12 posterior ligament injury
(Figure 2). Figure 1Sagittal computed tomography scan showing an enlargement of T11 and T12 spinous processes, which suggests a ligament
injury Figure 2Magnetic resonance imaing showing complete rupture of posterior ligaments (supra and interspinous) between T11 and T12 The
fracture was classified as AO B21 type, that is mechanically unstable, and therefore surgical treatment was indicated. The patient was
temporarily immobilized with a thoracic-lumbar-sacral orthosis and transferred to another city where the surgery was performed 3 days after
the trauma. The patient underwent a posterior monosegmental fusion (T11-T12) with instrumentation called “interne fixator” (Depuy Synthes,
United States) combined with autologous iliac graft. The patient was discharged 2 days after the procedure without external immobilization.
Two weeks after the surgery, she initiated physical rehabilitation with exercises to maintain muscle tone, but she was partial restricted to
perform rotational movements and bending of the trunk. As local pain decreased, speed walking, stationary biking and resistance-type weight
lifting exercises for lower extremities were introduced. The exercise program had progressive intensity and last for 6 months. After six
months, the patient was authorized to return to her professional activities without restrictions. In the 4-year follow-up after the surgery,
she maintained a professional athlete’s routine without back pain or physical limitations. There were no complications related to implants
(screw loosening, pull out or breakage) or radiographic signs of the adjacent level disease. The last follow-up images performed 4 years
after the procedure showed solid bilateral bone fusion (Figures 3A to 3E). Figure 3(A) coronal computed tomography scan showing complete
T11-T12 fusion; (B) sagittal computed tomography scan showing complete T11-T12 fusion; (C) axial postoperative computed tomography scan; (D)
postoperative anteroposterior X-ray showing proper coronal spine alignment; (E) postoperative lateral X-ray showing proper sagittal spine
alignment The occurrence of spine fractures during sports activities is quite frequent and they mainly involve the cervical spine.2Most of
described cases were caused by compression mechanisms.2Boden et al.3,4 reviewed cases of severe spinal injuries during sports practice in
the United States, and they concluded that soccer, ice hockey, wrestling, diving, snowboarding and rugby were the risky sports regarding
spine lesions. In the United States, approximately 8.7% of all new cases of spinal cord injuries are related to sports practice.3-5 In 1948,
Chance,6 described a spinal fracture characterized by a horizontal vertebral line affecting posterior elements (spinous process, lamina,
transverse processes and pedicles) with extension to the vertebral body. At that time such injuries mainly occurred after car accidents, and
especially in those who were using a “two points” seat belt. For this reason, the injury became popularly known as “seat belt fracture”. The
Chance or seat belt fracture, as initially described, affects only bone elements. For this reason, it is likely to be treated conservatively
with brace or hyperextension plaster cast. However, when rupture of the posterior tension band complex is present, as observed in our case,
surgical treatment is indicated especially because ligament healing is inadequate and instability may occur.6 These lesions are often
described as Chance fracture with ligament involvement. Chance fractures are caused by high-energy mechanisms, therefore, they are rarely
described during sports practice. The only case reported of Chance fracture during sports activities was during a 12-foot high snowboarder
fall.7However, there are several reports of thoracolumbar spine fractures (AO type A) during sports such as rugby, football, basketball,
wrestling, winter sports and diving.3-5 A detailed physical examination may reveal dorsal pain, hematoma or painful gap. This latter is
highly suggestive of posterior ligamentar injury. In this case report, such injury was not recognized during the initial approach at the
game field. However, proper immobilization and referral to the hospital for further evaluation avoided additional spine damage. The initial
care of a patient with spine trauma includes proper immobilization of the affected segment, use of cervical collar and/or rigid board, and
immediate orthopedic evaluation.8 The detection of interspinous space enlargement on X-rays or CT scan suggests flexion-distraction
injuries. Such fractures may also have minimum compression of the anterior portion of the vertebral body.6 When posterior ligamentar injury
is suspected, a magnetic resonance imaging better identifies it.7 In addition, the magnetic resonance imaging may provide important
information about other soft structures, such as intervertebral discs, spinal cord and roots, specially when neurological disorders are
present. Treatment is defined based on the presence of mechanical instability or neurological impairment.6-8 Pure bone lesions, as described
by Chance, can be treated with hyperextension orthosis, and often have a good clinical result.6 The presence of a complete ligament injury,
as observed in our case, is an indication for spine stabilization in order to prevent further instability.6,7,9 As anterior elements are
usually intact, there is no need for anterior column reconstruction.6 In our case, instrumentation was performed with AO internal fixator
using Schanz screws (Synthes, United States). This system provides a significant lever arm to facilitate reduction of the fracture and
restore the sagittal contour of the spine.10 An adequate spine fusion is expected to occur about 3 to 6 months after surgery and could be
confirmed by computed tomography scan. The computed tomography scan performed 6 months after the surgery showed a solid T11-12 fusion. At
that point, the rehabilitation program was intensified and restrictions were no longer necessary regarding sports activities. This paper
alerts to the occurrence of severe spine lesions during soccer practice and to the importance of adequate initial care at the game field in
order to avoid iatrogenic neurological lesions. If a complete posterior spine tension band injury is present, the injury is considered
mechanically unstable and eligible to surgical treatment. Relatamos um caso raro de fratura instável da coluna vertebral com envolvimento
ligamentar, ocorrida por mecanismo de flexão-distração, durante jogo de futebol feminino profissional. Não houve déficit neurológico. A
paciente apresentava espaçamento doloroso dorsal na linha média, que sugeriu lesão ligamentar, a qual não foi reconhecida imediatamente.
Apesar disso, realizaram-se imobilização adequada e encaminhamento para unidade hospitalar, fatos que evitaram a ocorrência de danos
adicionais à medula espinal. A paciente foi submetida à fusão monossegmentar, com instrumentação e, após 6 meses, retornou à prática de
futebol profissional. O presente estudo alerta para a possibilidade de ocorrência de lesões graves e instáveis na coluna durante a prática
de futebol, e para importância da assistência inicial adequada ainda em campo, a fim de evitar lesões neurológicas iatrogênicas. Fraturas da
coluna vertebral podem ocorrer em atletas de colisão. Nessa população, a maioria das fraturas são por compressão e afetam principalmente a
coluna cervical, além de serem mecanicamente estáveis. As lesões em flexão-distração, também conhecidas como fratura de Chance, são
classicamente causadas por meio de traumas de alta energia, tais como acidentes automobilísticos e quedas. Tais fraturas são potencialmente
instáveis e mais comumente relacionadas a déficits neurológicos. Relatar a possibilidade de ocorrência de fraturas instáveis durante prática
de futebol e o tratamento dessas lesões em atletas profissionais. Paciente do sexo feminino, JQC, 23 anos de idade, jogadora profissional de
futebol, sofreu trauma no dorso após colidir com jogadora oponente durante salto. A paciente relatou que sua oponente pulou mais alto do que
ela e caiu sob suas costas, forçando-a a flexionar-se. Imediatamente após o trauma, a atleta apresentou dor intensa nessa região dorsal e
não foi capaz de continuar no jogo. Não foram relatadas dor irradiada para os membros inferiores, parestesia e nem perda de força. A
paciente foi imobilizada com colar cervical e prancha longa, e, então, encaminhada para avaliação de urgência ao hospital mais próximo. Ao
exame físico, observaram-se espaçamento doloroso dorsal na linha média e edema na topografia da transição toracolombar. Não havia alteração
neurológica. A tomografia computadorizada revelou fratura em T12 e aumento do espaço entre os processos espinhosos de T11-T12 (Figura 1).
Devido a suspeita de lesão do complexo ligamentar posterior, foi realizada ressonância magnética, que revelou lesão ligamentar posterior em
T11-T12 (Figura 2). Figura 1Tomografia computorizada sagital mostrando alargamento dos processos espinhosos em T11 e T12, sugerindo lesão
ligamentar Figura 2Ressonância magnética por imagem mostrando ruptura completa dos ligamentos posteriores (supra e interespinhosos) entre
T11 e T12 A fratura foi classificada como tipo AO B2,1 ou seja mecanicamente instável, e houve indicação de tratamento cirúrgico. A paciente
foi imobilizada temporariamente com órtese tóraco-lombo-sacra e transferida para outra cidade, onde foi submetida à cirurgia 3 dias mais
tarde. Realizou-se fusão monossegmentar posterior (T11-T12), com instrumentação denominada “fixador interno” (Depuy Synthes, Estados
Unidos), associada a enxertia óssea autóloga de crista ilíaca. A paciente recebeu alta hospitalar 2 dias após o procedimento sem
imobilização externa. Duas semanas após a cirurgia, iniciou-se reabilitação física com exercícios para manter o tônus muscular, com
restrição parcial de movimentos rotacionais e curvatura do tronco. Com a diminuição da dor, introduziram-se caminhadas, bicicleta
ergométrica e exercícios de resistência dos membros inferiores com elevação de peso. O programa de exercícios progrediu em intensidade e
teve duração de 6 meses. Após 6 meses, a paciente foi autorizada a retornar suas atividades profissionais sem restrições. No seguimento de 4
anos após a cirurgia, mantinha a rotina de atleta profissional e não apresentava dores nas costas e nem limitações físicas. Não foram
observadas complicações relacionadas aos implantes (frouxidão, soltura ou quebra de parafusos) ou sinais radiográficos de doença do nível
adjacente. As imagens do último seguimento, realizadas 4 anos após o procedimento, mostraram fusão óssea bilateral sólida (Figuras 3A a 3E).
Figura 3(A) tomografia computorizada coronal mostrando fusão completa de T11-12; (B) tomografia computadorizada sagital mostrando fusão
completa em T11-T12; (C) tomografia computadorizada axial no pós-operatório; (D) raio X anteroposterior após a cirurgia, mostrando
alinhamento coronal adequado da coluna; (E) raio X lateral após a cirurgia, mostrando alinhamento sagital adequado da coluna A ocorrência de
fraturas da coluna vertebral durante atividades esportivas é relativamente frequente e afeta principalmente a coluna cervical.2 A maioria
dos casos descritos foram causados por mecanismos de compressão.2 Boden et al.3,4 revisaram casos de lesão de coluna grave durante a prática
esportiva nos Estados Unidos e concluíram que futebol, hóquei no gelo, luta olímpica, mergulho, snowboard e rúgbi foram os esportes com
maiores risco em relação às lesões de coluna. Nos Estados Unidos, aproximadamente 8,7% de todas os novos casos de lesões da medula espinal
são relacionadas à prática esportiva.3-5 Em 1948, Chance6 descreveu fratura da coluna vertebral caracterizada por linha horizontal vertebral
afetando elementos posteriores (processo espinhoso, lâmina, processos transversos e pedículos), com extensão ao corpo vertebral. Naquele
momento, observou-se que tais lesões ocorriam principalmente após acidentes automotivos, em especial com sistemas que utilizavam “cinto de
dois pontos”. Esse fato levou a lesão a ser conhecida como “fratura do cinto de segurança”. A fratura de Chance, ou fratura de cinto de
segurança, como descrita inicialmente, afeta apenas os elementos ósseos vertebrais posteriores. Portanto, geralmente é tratada de modo
conservador com órtese plástica ou gessada em hiperextensão. No entanto, quando há ruptura do complexo da banda de tensão posterior, como
observado no presente caso, há necessidade de intervenção cirúrgica, devido à impossibilidade de cicatrização ligamentar adequada, fato que
leva à instabilidade mecânica.6 Essas lesões são geralmente descritas como fratura de Chance com envolvimento ligamentar. As fraturas de
Chance são causadas por mecanismos de alta energia e raramente são descritas durante a prática de esportes. O único caso relatado de fratura
de Chance durante atividade esportiva foi de queda de altura aproximada de 3,5m, durante prática de snowboard.7 Porém, há alguns relatos de
fraturas toracolombar (AO tipo A) durante esportes como rúgbi, futebol, basquetebol, luta olímpica, esportes de inverno e mergulho.3-5 O
exame físico detalhado pode revelar dor dorsal, hematoma ou intervalo doloroso na linha média dorsal. Esse último é bastante sugestivo de
lesão ligamentar posterior. Neste relato, tais lesões não foram reconhecidas durante a abordagem inicial feita ainda no campo de futebol. No
entanto, a imobilização apropriada e o encaminhamento ao hospital para avaliação evitou lesão adicional da coluna. O tratamento inicial de
pacientes com trauma de coluna vertebral inclui imobilização apropriada do segmento afetado, uso de colete cervical e/ou prancha rígida, e
avaliação ortopédica imediata.8 A detecção de alargamento do espaço interespinhoso no raio X ou na tomografia computadorizada sugere lesões
tipo distração-flexão. Tais fraturas também podem apresentar compressão mínima da porção anterior do corpo vertebral.6 Quando há suspeita de
ruptura ligamentar posterior, a ressonância magnética permite melhor identificação da lesão.7 Além disso, a ressonância magnética
possibilita informação importante sobre outras estruturas moles, como discos intervertebrais, medula espinal e raízes, especialmente quando
há déficit neurológico. O tratamento é definido de acordo com a presença de instabilidade mecânica ou défice neurológico.6-8 Lesões
puramente ósseas, como descritas por Chance, podem ser tratadas com órtese em hiperextensão e apresentar bons resultados clínicos.6 A
presença de lesão ligamentar completa, como observado nesse relato, é uma indicação para estabilização do coluna vertebral, de modo a
prevenir outras instabilidades.6,7,9 Como os elementos anteriores são geralmente intactos, não há necessidade de reconstrução da coluna
anterior.6 No presente relato, a instrumentação foi realizada com fixador interno AO e parafusos tipo Schanz (Synthes, Estados Unidos). O
sistema possibilita braço de alavanca, que facilita a redução da fratura e a restauração do contorno sagital da coluna vertebral.10 A fusão
adequada da coluna vertebral é esperada de 3 a 6 meses após a cirurgia, e pode ser confirmada por tomografia computadorizada. Em nosso
estudo, esse exame foi realizado 6 meses após a cirurgia e mostrou fusão sólida em T11-T12. Nesse momento, a reabilitação foi intensificada,
não havendo mais restrições para prática esportiva. O presente relato alerta sobre a ocorrência de lesões graves da coluna durante a prática
de futebol e a importância de assistência inicial adequada ainda no campo do jogo, de modo a evitar lesões neurológicas iatrogênicas. A
presença de lesão completa do complexo ligamentar posterior deve ser considerada mecanicamente instável e elegível ao tratamento cirúrgico.
