Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Case series Patient: — Final Diagnosis: Beare-Stevenson syndrome Symptoms: — Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: Genetic analysis Specialty: Pediatrics and Neonatology Rare disease Beare-Stevenson syndrome (BSS) is an extremely rare
genetic disorder, with fewer than 25 cases reported worldwide. This autosomal dominant syndrome has been linked to two mutations in the
fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 gene (FGFR2), Tyr375Cys and Ser372Cys, both causing amino acid changes. BSS is characterized by a range
of morphological features, some more classically associated than others, of which craniosynostosis has been almost uniformly present. Other
common features include cutis gyrata, acanthosis nigricans, ear and eye defects, skin/mucosal tissue tags, prominent umbilical stump, and
anogenital anomalies. This account reports what we believe to be the 25th case of BSS, and exhibits a constellation of the characteristic
features similar to those previously described, including the presence of cutis gyrata, proptosis, a bifid scrotum, and hypospadias.
However, craniosynostosis was not detected prenatally by ultrasound or at birth. Prenatal ultrasound may detect some dysmorphic features of
BSS. Many of these features have also been associated with other genetic disorders with overlapping phenotypes. Our case presented with the
unusual features of a natal tooth and absence of craniosynostosis at birth. At birth, a diagnosis of BSS was suspected based on clinical
features despite the absence of craniosynostosis. This was later confirmed with the use of molecular analysis, revealing a Tyr375Cys
mutation of exon 9 of the FGFR2 gene. We suggest that a normal antenatal ultrasound scan and the absence of craniosynostosis at birth should
not preclude further workup for BSS if this possibility is clinically suspected. Beare-Stevenson syndrome (BSS) is an extremely rare genetic
disorder, with fewer than 25 cases reported worldwide. This autosomal dominant syndrome has been linked primarily to mutations in the
fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 gene (FGFR2), especially Tyr375Cys or Ser372Cys . BSS is characterized by a broad range of morphological
features, some more classically associated than others, of which craniosynostosis, especially clover-leaf skull, has been almost uniformly
present at birth. Other common features include cutis gyrata, acanthosis nigricans, skin tags, ear defects, and a prominent umbilical stump
. This article reports what we believe to be the 25th case of BSS, exhibiting a constellation of the characteristic features, but is one of
the very few cases lacking craniosynostosis at birth, as well as having a natal tooth encompassed by a cyst. A male infant, twin B of
monochorionic, diamniotic twins, was born at 33 weeks gestation via emergency cesarean section for preterm labor. The mother was 36 years
old and the father’s age was unknown. Her obstetric history was gravida 4, para 1, with a history of 2 elective terminations. Antepartum
history included moderate polyhydramnios detected at the 26th week of gestation. Normal sequential maternal screen including normal nuchal
translucency for both twin A and B was reported. The mother declined additional prenatal genetic testing. There was no evidence of antenatal
craniosynostosis on a fetal sonogram at 31 weeks gestation. Twin A was a still-born with severely macerated skin and an edematous body, at
weight of 1945 gm (48th percentile) and length of 45.7 cm (78th percentile). Birth weight of twin B was 2470 gm (94th percentile), 44.4 cm
in length (60th percentile) with a head circumference of 34 cm (99th percentile). Apgar scores were 1, 3, and 5 at 1, 5, and 10 minutes,
respectively. The patient was transferred to our neonatal intensive care unit. Physical examination revealed craniotabes with a widely
separated sagittal suture, an enlarged anterior fontanelle extending over the nasal bridge, and frontal bossing with cutis gyrata over the
forehead and bilaterally in the preauricular areas. The infant’s mid-facial region showed severe proptosis bilaterally and ocular
hypertelorism, a flattened nasal bridge, and low-set anterior and posterior hairlines. He was also noted to have hypoplastic nipples, a
bifid scrotum, and hypospadias. The palms and soles bilaterally had thickened skin with deep creases, and the fingers were short. The back
was intact with bogginess over the lower lumbosacral area of the spine. The patient was intubated immediately after birth due to respiratory
distress. On day two of life, otolaryngology was consulted due to difficulty passing a suction catheter through both nostrils. Suspected
bilateral choanal atresia was confirmed with a CT scan, which also revealed bilateral intraventricular hemorrhage but no evidence of
craniosynostosis. The patient was subsequently transferred to another facility for specialized surgery for repair of choanal atresia.
However, this was unsuccessful due to mid-face hypoplasia. Tracheostomy was placed and the baby was transferred back to our NICU for further
management. The patient was discovered to have a natal tooth encompassed by a cyst, which required extraction. Pathology revealed normal
human tooth histology. The remainder of his course was significant for development of hydrocephalus secondary to aqueductal stenosis. Due to
these findings, the patient was transferred for neurosurgical evaluation. BSS was suspected clinically and confirmed by sequence analysis of
the FGFR2 gene, which revealed a heterozygous Tyr375Cys missense mutation of exon 9. This mutation has been reported in other cases of BSS
(Table 1). The mutation was not tested for in twin A because further testing and autopsy was declined by the parents. Genetic counselling
was then provided to the parents in regards to screening for future pregnancies. Beare-Stevenson syndrome (BSS) was first described in 1969
in an infant who displayed a unique constellation of features . This constellation included craniosynostosis, cutis gyrata, hypertelorism,
choanal atresia, cleft palate, premature eruption of teeth, acanthosis nigricans, hypoplastic nipples, and bifid scrotum. In 1986, D.W.
Smith Workshop delineated the features from the six cases reported at that time, and named the condition Beare-Stevenson cutis gyrata
syndrome . Defined features of the syndrome included craniofacial anomalies (particularly craniosynostosis), cutis gyrata, acanthosis
nigricans, skin/mucosal tissue tags, ear defects, prominent umbilical stump, and anogenital anomalies. BSS has been linked to mutations in
the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene, most commonly Tyr375Cys but also Ser372Cys, although other mutations in FGFR2 have
been reported . Both are missense mutations that are thought to cause constitutive activation of FGFR2 isoforms. This ultimately results in
upregulation of signal transduction pathways involved in skeletal and skin development . Here, we report a case of BSS that exhibits all of
the classic features seen in the original cases that defined this genetic disorder except for the absence of craniosynostosis at birth and
the unusual manifestation of a natal tooth . These uncommon findings are compared with the findings in previously reported cases in Tables 1
and 2. Although BSS has not been classically associated with advanced parental age, this possible association can be investigated in future
cases as data is not readily available from previous cases. Since the delineation of BSS in 1986, the pattern of anomalies described in
reported cases has remained notably similar. Since these clinical characteristics have also been associated with a variety of other genetic
disorders with overlapping phenotypes, and there is some variation in the presentation of BSS (Tables 1 and 2), clinical suspicion of BSS
should be confirmed using molecular mutation analysis. This is especially true in the absence of typically reported features such as
craniosynostosis at birth. Given the relatively small number of reported cases, it is difficult at this time to make definitive
phenotypic/genotypic correlations for BSS. Testing was performed by the Mt. Sinai Genetic Testing Laboratory, New York, NY,U.S.A. Comparison
of clinical and laboratory findings of known cases with Beare-Stevenson syndrome*. M – Male; F –Female; ‘+’ – present; ‘--’ – mentioned
absent; NM – not mentioned, NT – not tested. Adapted from You-Chen et al. (2010). Summary of clinical findings in known cases of BSS*. ‘+’ –
Present, ‘–’ – absence; summary of mentioned findings in 24 BSS cases previously reported.
