A 57-year-old white man with no significant past medical history presented to the county hospital emergency room with complaints of
increasing fatigue and lightheadedness over the past year. Upon further questioning, he revealed a large ulcerative lesion on his upper back
that he reported started as a small ulcer and progressed to its current size over a 16-year period. The patient had not sought any medical
attention throughout this time. The patient had no known history of malignancy, immunosuppressive conditions, autoimmune disorders, exposure
to communicable diseases, or travel outside of the United States. His vital signs were within normal limits. Physical examination revealed a
26cmx16cm ulcerative lesion spanning the T1 through T8 vertebral bodies with exposure of the spinous processes and paravertebral
musculature, which was most prominent at the level of T5. The lesion contained punctate areas of bleeding, granulation tissue, and copious
serous drainage. The boarders were clearly defined and without satellite lesions (Figure 1). Other than pallor of the skin, the remainder of
the physical examination, including a full neurological assessment, was unremarkable. In the emergency room, a computed tomography scan of
the chest/abdomen/pelvis was performed and two individual punch biopsies of the ulcer bed were taken. The computed tomography scan showed
erosion of the thoracic spinous processes but no evidence of metastatic disease. A complete blood count revealed a hemoglobin and white
blood count of 4.6g/dL and 6.9 cells x 103/µL, respectively. On admission the patient was transfused for his symptomatic anemia and started
on ferrous sulfate. Figure 1Giant ulcerative basal cell carcinoma of the upper back measuring 26cmx16cm with exposure of the paravertebral
musculature and thoracic spinous processes. The patient had a tattoo on his back since adolescence, before the development of the lesion
Despite the absence of neurological signs on physical exam, the magnetic resonance imaging of the back was required to assess for spinal
cord involvement. Even without a pathological diagnosis, invasion of the spinal cord required urgent management. Dexamethasone was given
until magnetic resonance imaging results confirmed the absence of spinal cord involvement (Figures 2 and 3).1 In addition, the until
magnetic resonance imaging provided a more detailed picture of the depth of invasion and the local extension than the original computed
tomography scan. Figure 2Midline sagittal view of the spine using magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating absence of spinal cord
involvement Figure 3Axial view of the spine at T5 using magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating absence of spinal cord involvement At this
juncture, the proper formulation of a differential diagnosis is critical for guiding the next steps in management. The most likely
pathogenic processes underlying cutaneous ulcers are immune-mediated, infectious, and neoplastic, although ulcers can also develop secondary
to chronic venous or arterial insufficiency.2 Pyoderma gangrenosum, which is associated with a host of autoimmune diseases, including
inflammatory bowel disease and rheumatoid arthritis, can often bear a similar ulcerative morphology, but without other co-morbidities and no
symptoms such as abnormal bowel habits or joint pain. The diagnosis of pyoderma gangrenosum occurring independently is unlikely.3 For an
infectious process, the differential diagnosis would include Buruli ulcer, which is focally endemic in Sub-Saharan Africa and is caused by
Mycobacterium ulcerans ; phagedenic ulcer, a polybacterial infection with higher incidence in tropical regions; and necrotizing fasciitis
caused by Gram- positive cocci.4,5 Of these infections, necrotizing fasciitis is associated with high fever and rapid progression. Taken
together with the patient’s negative travel history, the absence of both fever and leukocytosis suggested a non-infectious disease process,
and thus, empiric antibiotic treatment and bacterial cultures were not indicated. A vascular etiology was also unlikely given the location
of the lesion and the absence of any prior trauma or radiation to that area. After 2 days, histopathological results of the punch biopsies
returned, with both specimens consistent with ulcerated basal cell carcinoma. The patient was given instructions for wound care, provided
with supplies, and discharged with infectious disease, radiation oncology, and physical therapy referrals. An outpatient bone biopsy was
ordered to assess for suspected osteomyelitis. The image-guided biopsy of the T3 spinous process confirmed acute osteomyelitis with a Gomori
methenamine silver stain negative for fungal elements and an acid-fast bacilli stain negative for acid-fast organisms. After the
multidisciplinary tumor board review excluded the possibility of surgical excision due to the wide extension of the lesion, radiation
therapy was planned for management. Radiation therapy has previously shown efficiency for reducing the size of the target lesion and for
symptom palliation in non-melanoma skin cancers using a 0-7-21 day regimen.6 Homem branco, 57 anos, sem histórico médico significante,
admitido no serviço de emergência queixando-se de fadiga aumentada e tontura iniciada há 1 ano. Durante a consulta, o paciente mencionou
extensa lesão ulcerativa no alto do dorso, que iniciou como pequena úlcera e progrediu ao longo de 16 anos. Durante esse período, o paciente
não procurou tratamento. Não havia histórico de malignidade, condições imunossupressoras, exposição a doença contagiosa, ou relato de viagem
para fora dos Estados Unidos. Os sinais vitais estavam dentro dos padrões normais. O exame físico revelou lesão ulcerativa medindo
26cmx16cm, abrangendo os corpos vertebrais de T1 a T8, com exposição dos processos espinhosos e musculatura paravertebral mais proeminente
no nível de T5. A lesão continha áreas de sangramento pontilhados, tecido granulado e drenagem copiosa de seroma. As margens estavam bem
definidas e sem lesões satélites (Figura 1). Além da palidez da pele no restante do exame físico, que incluiu avaliação neurológica
completa, não foram observados outros fatores significantes. Na emergência, realizou-se tomografia computadorizada do tórax/abdômen, pélvis,
além de duas biópsias individuais por punção do leito da úlcera. A tomografia computadorizada mostrou erosão dos processos espinhosos
torácicos, porém não havia evidência de doença metastática. O hemograma relevou hemoglobina e leucócitos de 4,6g/dL e 6,9 células x 103/µL,
respectivamente. Na internação, o paciente recebeu transfusão devido à sua anemia assintomática e iniciou terapia com sulfato ferroso.
Figura 1Carcinoma basocelular gigante ulcerado no alto do dorso medindo 26cmx16cm com exposição de musculatura paravertebral e processos
espinhosos torácicos. O paciente possuía tatuagem no dorso desde sua adolescência, antes do desenvolvimento da lesão Apesar da ausência de
sinais neurológicos no exame físico, foi solicitada ressonância magnética do dorso, para avaliar o envolvimento da coluna vertebral. Mesmo
sem diagnóstico patológico, a invasão da coluna vertebral sinalizou necessidade de conduta de emergência. Foi administrada dexametasona até
que os resultados da ressonância magnética confirmassem ausência de envolvimento da coluna vertebral (Figuras 2 e 3).1 Além disso, a
ressonância mostrou quadro mais detalhado da profundidade da invasão e da extensão do local, do que os resultados da tomografia
computadorizada. Figura 2Visão da linha média sagital da espinha, por meio de ressonância magnética, demostrando ausência do envolvimento do
cordão espinhal Figura 3Visão axial de espinha em T5, por meio de ressonância magnética, demostrando ausência de envolvimento do cordão
espinhal Formular um diagnóstico diferencial apropriado é crucial para guiar os próximos passos da conduta. Os processos patogênicos mais
prováveis de úlceras cutâneas subjacentes são imunomediados, infecciosos e neoplásicos, apesar de a úlcera também poder se desenvolver
secundariamente à insuficiência venosa ou a arterial crônicas.2 A piodermite gangrenosa, que é associada como hospedeira de doenças
autoimune, incluindo doença inflamatória intestinal e artrite reumatoide, pode normalmente carregar morfologia ulcerativa similar, porém sem
outras comorbidades e sintomas, como hábitos intestinais anormais ou dores articulares. O diagnóstico de piodermite gangrenosa de modo
independente é improvável.3 Para um processo infecioso, o diagnóstico diferencial deve incluir úlcera de Buruli, que é focalmente endêmica
na África Subsaariana e causada por Mycobacterium ulcerans ; úlcera fagedênica, infecção polibacteriana com alta incidência em regiões
tropicais; e fasciite necrosante, causada por cocos Gram -positivos.4,5 Dessas infecções, a fasciite necrosante é associada com febre alta e
progressão rápida. Devido ao não histórico de viagem do paciente, a ausência de febre e a leucocitose sugeriram processo de doença não
infeciosa e, portanto, tratamento antibiótico empírico e culturas bacterianas não foram indicados. Também era improvável um etiologia
vascular, dada a localização da lesão e a ausência de qualquer trauma anterior ou radiação na área. Depois de 2 dias, os resultados
histopatológicos das biópsias retornaram, e ambas as espécimes foram consistentes com carcinoma basocelular ulcerado. O paciente recebeu
instruções para cuidar da ferida, teve suprimentos disponibilizados e recebeu alta, sendo encaminhado para tratamento de doença infeciosas,
radiação oncológica e reabilitação física. Solicitou-se biópsia óssea, para avaliar suspeita de osteomelite. A biópsia guiada por imagem de
processo espinhoso T3 confirmou osteomielite aguda com coloração de metenamina prata de Gomori negativa para elementos fúngicos, e coloração
para a detecção de micobactérias negativa para bactérias ácido-álcool resistentes. Após exclusão da ressecção cirúrgica do tumor pela equipe
multidisciplinar avaliadora, devido à sua extensão, foi agendada a radioterapia. A radioterapia já se mostrou efetiva para reduzir o tamanho
de lesões e também para alívio dos sintomas em câncer de pele não melanoma, utilizando regime de 0-7-21 dias.6
