The spectrum of neurological complications associated with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection is broad. The most frequent
etiologies include primary diseases (caused by HIV itself) or secondary diseases (opportunistic infections or neoplasms). Despite these
conditions, HIV-infected patients are susceptible to other infections observed in patients without HIV infection. Here we report a rare case
of a brain abscess caused by Staphylococcus aureus in an HIV-infected patient. After drainage of the abscess and treatment with oxacilin,
the patient had a favorable outcome. This case reinforces the importance of a timely neurosurgical procedure that supported adequate
management of an unusual cause of expansive brain lesions in HIV-1 infected patients. The spectrum of neurological complications associated
with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection is extremely heterogeneous and includes primary diseases (caused by HIV itself)
or secondary (opportunistic infections or neoplasms). Opportunistic neurological manifestations can be classified according to the
predominant neurological syndrome involved in meningeal or encephalic syndrome. The encephalic syndrome can be classified in focal or with
diffuse involvement and focal brain lesions may or may not show mass effect1. Cerebral toxoplasmosis represents the most frequent cause of
expansive brain lesions in HIV-infected patients. In Brazil, focal forms of the central nervous system (CNS) tuberculosis (particularly
tuberculomas and rarely abscesses) constitute the main differential diagnosis of cerebral toxoplasmosis. Primary CNS lymphomas are uncommon
in our setting2. Several other infections may occasionally present with focal lesions in HIV-infected patients, including Nocardia species,
Varicella-zoster virus, Aspergillus species, Listeria monocytogenes, Treponema pallidum, Histoplasma capsulatum, and Cryptococcus
neoformans. Some of these microorganisms are more commonly causes of meningitis, but they may cause focal processes3. In addition to
neurological complications associated with HIV-1 infection, these patients can present etiologies that are not commonly associated with
immunossupression. In this report, we present the case of a HIV-1 infected patient with a brain abscess caused by Staphylococcus aureus and
discuss several challenging issues about the management of expansive brain lesions in this kind of host. A 76-year-old man was admitted to
the emergency room after being found disoriented by his family. He experienced episodes of fever (38-39.5 Â°C) in previous days. There were
no other complaints including headache or seizures. His prior history included an HIV-1 infection diagnosed 10 years before, pulmonary
tuberculosis, hypertension and hyperthyroidism. His medications included zidovudine, lamivudine, efavirenz, tiamazol, and captopril. The
last laboratorial results showed a CD4 cell count of 668 cells/mm3 and HIV viral load < 50 copies/mL. At admission, the physical examination
showed a patient in good general conditions, moderately dehydrated and pale, afebrile, and hemodynamically stable. The neurological exam
showed disorientation in time and space with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 14. The rest of the examination was normal. Laboratorial tests showed
leukocytosis with left shift and no other alterations. A brain computed tomography scan showed a single low attenuation lesion with a
uniform ring enhancement in the left temporal region (Fig. 1A). At this moment, empiric treatment for toxoplasmosis with parenteral
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (5/ 25 mg/ kg twice a day) was initiated. Seven days later, the patient's level of consciousness worsened,
presenting disorientation and confusion. At this moment, after a review of the prior images, the hypothesis of bacterial or mycobacterial
brain abscess was considered and ceftriaxone (2 g twice a day) and metronidazole (500 mg three times a day) were started. A lumbar puncture
showed 1 cell/dL, 56 mg/dL of glucose, and 40 mg/dL of proteins. The cerebrospinal fluid direct exam and bacteria, fungus and mycobacteria
cultures were all negative. The latex agglutination test for Cryptococcus neoformans,Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitides
andHaemophylus influenzae type B, and the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for these bacteria as well as for Mycobacterium tuberculosis were
also all negative. Blood cultures performed by automated microbiology growth and detection system for aerobic, anaerobic and fungi resulted
negative. The patient underwent trepanation, and drainage of the lesion was performed. Purulent material was obtained and sent to culture,
which resulted in the growth of methicillin-sensitive S. aureus. Anti-Toxoplasma treatment was discontinued and antibiotic scheme was
changed to oxacillin (2 g six times a day). The patient received eight weeks of this medication, improved progressively, clinically and
radiologically (Fig. 1B-C) and was discharged to home. The patient underwent dental examination, with no evidence of dental infection. At
transesophageal echocardiography the valves and left atrium were free of thrombi and vegetations, and there was no evidence of infection in
thechest radiography and also in the abdominal ultrasound. In the daily assessment, measures of capillary glycemia were normal. Despite
intensive efforts, no predisposing condition leading to the brain abscess, including trauma or surgery, intravenous drug use, skin or soft
tissue infection, empyema, lung or intraabdominal abscess, bacterial endocarditis, dental infection, sinusitis or mastoiditis, were
identified. Fig. 1- Evolution of contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of an HIV-infected patient with a brain abscess due to
Staphylococcus aureus. A , pre-trepanation CT showing a single expansive brain lesion in the left temporal area. B, after one week of
trepanation, CT scan demonstrates a marked diminution in the size of the lesion, residual enhancement and a residual degree of edema. C ,
ten months after trepanation, CT scan reveals only post-surgical changes. Here, we report a rare case of a brain abscess due to S. aureus in
an HIV-infected patient.We found only two case reports of brain abscesses caused byStaphylococcus aureus in HIV-infected patients. The first
case report has been criticized because the pathogen was isolated only from sputum cultures and skin samples, without any proof of the
invasive disease such as the isolation of the bacterium from blood or from the brain abscess4. The second case reported an HIV-infected
patient with a CD4 count of 85 cells/mm3, who presented an expansive lesion in the frontal lobe that did not show any improvement with
empiric therapy for cerebral toxoplasmosis. Stereotactic biopsy of the lesion was performed and purulent material was found. Gram staining
and culture revealed a methicillin-sensitive, cotrimoxazole-resistant S.aureus. Hematogenous dissemination from a cutaneous portal of entry
was strongly suspected, because of a recent history of furunculosis5. Current standard management for HIV-infected patients presenting with
CNS mass lesions is to initiate empiric anti-toxoplasmosis therapy because CNS toxoplasmosis is the most frequent cause of HIV-associated
intracranial lesions3 . The definitive diagnosis of cerebral toxoplasmosis requires the presence of tachyzoites of the parasite in cerebral
tissue6, but the availability and risks related to the brain biopsy precludes its routine use. Thus, if no clinical and radiological
response is evident after 10 to 14 days of empiric therapy, other causes (infectious or non-infectious) should be considered7. It should be
noted that if at admission or during the empirical treatment there is a high index of suspicion for an alternative diagnosis to cerebral
toxoplasmosis, an early brain biopsy should be considered2. In addition, it is important to consider other diagnoses than cerebral
toxoplasmosis in HIV-infected patients under immunological and virological control, including etiologies of patients without HIV infection,
for example, bacterial brain abscesses or tumors that are not related to immunossupression. In ageneral population, bacterial brain
abscesses can develop from three sources: first, because of the spread of infection from a pericranial contiguous focus (such as the
sinuses, middle ear, or dental infection) in 25-50% of cases; second: from a distant focus of infection (such as a lung abscess or empyema,
endocarditis, skin, or the intra-abdominal cavity), resulting in hematogenous spread in 15-30% of cases; and third, from a direct
inoculation such as a head trauma or neurosurgery in 8-19% of cases8. The origin of brain abscess formation remains unknown (cryptogenic
brain abscess) in 20-30% of cases8. In a general population, a wide range of pathogens can cause brain abscesses and Streptococci are the
most common pathogens, comprising about 70% of isolates9 . Staphylococcus aureus accounts for 10% 20% of isolates of brain abscesses in a
general population, usually reported in patients with cranial trauma or endocarditis, and it is often isolated in culture. Some cases caused
by community-associated methicillin-resistant S. aureus have been reported. Population-based studies have identified male gender and very
young and elderly individuals as being at increased risk for S. aureusinfections. Moreover, two studies showed that the most important risk
factor is dialysis, either peritoneal (relative risk , 150 to 204) or hemodialysis (RR, 257 to 291). Other conditions that increase the risk
of invasive S. aureus infections include diabetes (RR, 7), cancer (RR, 7.1 to 12.9), rheumatoid arthritis (RR, 2.2 to 9.2), HIV infection
(RR, 23.7), intravenous drug use (RR, 10.1), or alcohol abuse (RR, 8.2)10 , 11. However, one of the most important factors that is
independently associated to brain abscess is chronic S. aureus nasal carriage12. The status of HIV infection increases the chances of having
invasive staphylococcal disease13, but it is difficult to establish a cause-effect relationship in the present case. The purpose of this
article is to highlight the need of timely diagnosis of expansive brain lesions in HIV-infected patients, including brain abscess, because
it is a potentially fatal disease. Several studies have evaluated the findings of brain biopsies in the context of HIV infection and
bacterial brain abscess contributes to a small percentage of the cases14 , 15 , 16, reinforcing the rarity of this medical condition in this
setting.These studies highlight the utility of brain biopsy to uncover erroneous diagnostic hypotheses14. In conclusion, although rare, S.
aureus should be included in the differential diagnosis of expansive brain lesions in HIV-infected patients, despite the absence of
classical risk factors to invasive disease caused by this bacterium. Timely neurosurgical procedure, adequate identification and
susceptibility pattern of the microorganism, and an appropriate antibiotic, supported the favorable outcome in the present case.
