Reversible splenial lesion syndrome (RESLES) is a disorder radiologically characterized by reversible lesion in the splenium of the corpus
callosum (SCC). Most of patients with RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy were identified in Japanese population, but almost
no Chinese patients were diagnosed as RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy. Possible patients with reversible isolated SCC
lesions were retrieved from January 2012 to July 2015 using keyword “restricted diffusion and isolated SCC lesion” in MRI report system from
a large academic center. The clinical, laboratory and radiological data were summarized. A total of 15 encephalitis/encephalopathy patients
(9 males and 6 females) were identified with a reversible isolated SCC lesion. Except for 13 patients with fever symptom, 8 patients also
had cold symptoms before the onset of neurological symptoms. The neurological symptoms included headache, vertigo, seizure, disturbance of
consciousness, and delirious behavior. Thirteen patients completely recovered within 1 month, but 2 patients who were subjected to
mechanical ventilation had persistent neurological deficits. The initial MRI features showed isolated ovoid or extending SCC lesions with
homogeneous hyperintense on diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) and decreased apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values. The follow-up MRI
revealed that isolated SCC lesions with diffuse restriction disappeared at 10 to 32 days after the initial MRI study. Fractional anisotropy
map revealed the decreased value of SCC lesion in a severe case with poor prognosis. RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy is a
reversible syndrome with an excellent prognosis in most patients, while a few patients required ventilator supporting at the early stage
might have severe neurological sequelae. Reversible signal changes on DWI and ADC are identified in all patients, but fractional anisotropy
values can be decreased in severe patient with neurological sequelae. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12883-016-0572-9)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Reversible splenial lesion syndrome (RESLES) is characterized by
reversible lesion in the central portion of the splenium of corpus callosum (SCC) [1, 2]. RESLES is most often identified in patients with
seizures and/or antiepileptic drugs withdrawal [3, 4]. However, it is also frequently observed in encephalitis/encephalopathy caused by
various pathogens such as influenza virus, rotavirus, measles, herpesvirus 6, adenovirus, mumps, Epstein-Barr virus, Escherischia coli, and
others . The neurological symptoms of RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy can presented with delirious behavior, short
disturbance of consciousness, and seizures, but usually had complete recovery without neurological sequelae after a short disease course .
Therefore at sometimes, RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy was interchangeably termed as clinically mild
encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion (MERS) [12, 13]. Most of patients with RESLES associated with
encephalitis/encephalopathy were reported in Japanese population [14, 15]. However, there were few published reports of Chinese patients
diagnosed as RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy. In this study, we described the clinical data and outcomes in 15 Chinese
patients with RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy identified retrospectively in order to evaluate the clinical heterogeneity
of RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy. We performed a retrospective observational study in an academic hospital. Patients
with isolated lesion in the splenium of corpus callosum visited in the first affiliated hospital of Nanchang University between January 2012
and July 2015 were screened for the study. We identified all patients by searching our MRI report system using keyword “restricted diffusion
and isolated SCC lesion”. Exclusion criteria include epilepsy-related RESLES, RESLES with additional lesions in white matter, and cases
without follow-up MRI. We reviewed and analyzed MRI scans and clinical charts of these patients, including information about symptoms,
treatments, prognosis, electroencephalogram (EEG), and results of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. The clinical data and radiological
examinations were independently evaluated by at least two neurologists firstly. A reversible isolated SCC lesion is defined as a lesion
involving the central portion of SCC without any other lesions on the first MRI, which disappears on the follow-up scanning. According to
the literatures and clinician consensus, the diagnosis of encephalitis had been defined as acute onset of brain dysfunction such as acute
fever, headache, seizures, delirious behavior, and disorders of consciousness with inflammatory changes such as pleocytosis of CSF [2, 16].
When patients presented with prodromal febrile illness, but without evidence of inflammatory change in central nervous system, we used the
term encephalopathy [2, 16]. Fever is defined as mouth temperature more than 38 °C within the 72 h before or after presentation. The
clinical procedure of etiology investigating for encephalitis includes blood, CSF, and urine cultures; CSF gram stain, India Ink stain, and
modified acid-fast stain; CSF polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for herpes simplex virus 1 or 2, Epstein-Barr virus, and influenza A or B; PCR
for influenza A or B in nasopharyngeal swabs; herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV1), HSV2, HSV6, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and varicella-
zoster virus serum IgM, and 14 d later for paired IgG antibody testing; routine human immuno-deficiency virus, treponema pallidum
agglutination test, and venereal disease research laboratory test. This study was approved by the ethics committee of the First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanchang University. The written consent forms for clinical descriptions and radiological images were signed by the patients or
their guardians. Herein, two cases with poor outcomes were singled out and described in detail as follows, and other patients’ descriptions
were deposited in an Additional file 1. A 23-year-old man with the complaints of fever for 6 days, disturbance of consciousness for 4 h was
admitted to the hospital on March 14, 2012. The patient initially presented with cold symptoms including fever, nasal congestion, and
pharyngalgia 6 days ago. At the day of admission, he had temperature up to 39 °C, severe headache, and vomiting. He suddenly lost
consciousness and experienced a seizure at that night. The symptom of seizure completely stopped after 2–3 min, but coma was persistent.
Physical examination on admission revealed comatose state (Glasgow Coma Scale, GCS: 7), cyanosis, stiff neck, and no voluntary movements.
The emergent therapy included mechanical ventilation, antiviral (acyclovir), and antibiotics (cefoperazone). At 1 day after admission, he
can detach from the ventilator, but still was in comatose state. Cerebral MRI revealed an isolated lesion in the splenium of corpus callosum
with slight hyperintense on T2 weighted images (T2WI), slight hypointense on T1 weighted images (T1WI), no enhancement on contrast images,
obvious hyperintense on diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) (Fig. 1a), and decreased apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values (Fig. 1b).
Fractional anisotropy map revealed mildly decreased value of SCC lesion (Fig. 1c), but with normally projecting direction of white matter
fibers (Fig. 1f). At 4 days after admission, the patient experienced several seizures again, and became deep comatose (GCS: 5). The patient
was administrated with carbamazepine (400 mg/d), methylprednisolone (1000 mg/d), and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (2 g/kg). The
symptoms of seizure gradually disappeared, and the temperature returned to normal limits, while disturbance of consciousness was persistent.
Laboratory examination revealed serum chemistry, blood routine, thyroid function, serum ammonia, tumor biomarkers, extractable nuclei
antigen (ENA) polypeptide spectrum, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) were normal. A lumbar puncture revealed a mild
lymphocytic pleocytosis (20 cells/μL) with normal protein and glucose contents. Oligoclonal bands were negative in serum and CSF. The
quantity of myelin basic protein (MBP) was 3.8ug/L (normal <4ug/L) in CSF. Intrathecal IgG synthesis rate was 0.55 mg/24 h (normal
<0.7 mg/24 h). The etiological procedure found a positive PCR for influenza A in nasopharyngeal swabs, while other extensive microbiological
workups were negative. At 17 days after admission, second MRI showed the abnormalities of SCC nearly disappeared on DWI (Fig. 1d) and ADC
(Fig. 1e). Spinal cord MRI was normal. At 45 days, he was transferred back to local hospital for nursing care. After 1 year follow-up, the
patient was in vegetative state, nasogastric tube feeding, and bedridden.Fig. 1The cerebral MRI features of case 2. MRI revealed an isolated
SCC lesion with obvious hyperintense on DWI (a, arrow), decreased ADC values (b), decreased fractional anisotropy value (c), and normally
projecting direction of white matter fibers (f). At 16 days after initial MRI, second MRI showed the abnormalities of SCC nearly disappeared
on DWI (d) and ADC (e) The cerebral MRI features of case 2. MRI revealed an isolated SCC lesion with obvious hyperintense on DWI (a, arrow),
decreased ADC values (b), decreased fractional anisotropy value (c), and normally projecting direction of white matter fibers (f). At
16 days after initial MRI, second MRI showed the abnormalities of SCC nearly disappeared on DWI (d) and ADC (e) A 16-year-old boy with the
complaints of fever and headache for 5 days, delirious behaviors for 3 days, and consciousness disturbance for 1 day was admitted to the
hospital on February 12, 2014. The boy initially had fever, cough, and headache. After 3 days, the patient presented with severe headache,
vomiting, and irritability, so antiviral drug (acyclovir) was administrated. After 4 days, he had consciousness disturbance, but no seizures
were observed in the disease course. Physical examination on admission revealed comatose state (GCS: 8), slight limb movements responsive to
pain stimulus, and negativity of bilateral pathological reflex. On admission, cerebral MRI showed an isolated lesion in the central SCC with
slight hyperintense on T2WI (Fig. 2a), slight hypointense on T1WI (Fig. 2b), hyperintense on DWI (Fig. 2c), and apparent decreased ADC
values (Fig. 2d). A lumbar puncture revealed a mild elevation of cell counting (15 cells/uL) with normal protein and glucose content.
Oligoclonal bands were negative in serum and CSF. The quantity of MBP was 3.3ug/L in CSF. Intrathecal IgG synthesis rate was 0.61 mg/24 h.
Laboratory examination revealed serum chemistry, thyroid function, serum ammonia, tumor biomarkers, ENA polypeptide spectrum, and ANCA were
normal. At 1 day after admission, patients experienced more severe disturbance of consciousness, low blood pressure (70/50 mmHg), and
breathing difficulty with hypoxemia and acidosis, so mechanical ventilation was administrated immediately. Meanwhile, the patient was
administrated with methylprednisolone (1000 mg/d), IVIG (2 g/kg), antiviral (acyclovir), and antibiotics (vancomycin). At 10 days after
admission, the patient had stable vital signs, while he was still in comatose state. At 32 days after admission, second MRI showed abnormal
signals of the SCC completely disappearing on T2WI (Fig. 2e), T1WI (Fig. 2f), DWI (Fig. 2g) and ADC (Fig. 2h). After 7 months follow-up, the
patient was in a condition of agrypnocoma, nasogastric tube feeding, and bedridden.Fig. 2The cerebral MRI features of case 7. MRI showed an
isolated SCC lesion with slight hyperintense on T2WI (a), slight hypointense on T1WI (b), hyperintense on DWI (c, arrow), and obvious
decreased ADC values (d). At 32 days after first MRI, second MRI showed abnormal signals of the SCC completely disappearing on T2WI (e),
T1WI (f), DWI (g) and ADC (h) The cerebral MRI features of case 7. MRI showed an isolated SCC lesion with slight hyperintense on T2WI (a),
slight hypointense on T1WI (b), hyperintense on DWI (c, arrow), and obvious decreased ADC values (d). At 32 days after first MRI, second MRI
showed abnormal signals of the SCC completely disappearing on T2WI (e), T1WI (f), DWI (g) and ADC (h) Clinical features Of the 23 patients
with restricted diffusion on isolated lesion in SCC, 15 patients met the criteria for RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy and
8 patients were excluded from the study due to the following reasons: 6 had no follow-up MRI study; 1 had lesions in both SCC and bilateral
white matters; 1 was associated with possible epilepsy-related RESLES due to withdrawal of antiepileptic agents. The clinical data and
radiological images of 15 patients were reviewed by the co-authors together. The clinical findings of 15 patients were summarized in
Table 1.Table 1Clinical data of patients with RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathypatient no.age/sexinitial symptomCNS
manifestation (onset day)CNS diagnosisEEGCSFpathogenstherapyprognosis (day)115/Mfeverheadache (2d)encephalopathyslow BAnormalnegativeNoneCR
(14d)223/Mfever, nasal congestion, pharyngalgiaheadache, seizure, disturbance of consciousness, meningeal irritation sign
(6d)meningoencephalitisNECC: 20influenza AMPSL, IVIG, ACV, MV, CBZ, antibiotics,vegetative state327/Ffever, coughheadache, ataxia, slurred
language (2d)encephalopathyNEnormalnegativeDex, ACVCR (9d)438/Mfever, nasal congestion, coughheadache, vertigo
(1d)encephalopathyNEnormalherpesvirus-6ACVCR (11d)526/Mfever, myalgiasheadache, disturbance of consciousness (2d)encephalitisslow
BACC:110negativeACV, Dex, antibioticsCR (10d)631/Mfever, pharyngalgiavertigo (3d)encephalopathyslow BAnormalnegativeACV, antibioticsCR
(20d)716/Mfever, coughheadache, delirious behavior, disturbance of consciousness (2d)encephalitisNECC: 15negativeMPSL, IVIG, ACV,
MV,agrypnocoma837/Ffever, myalgiasheadache, tremor (1d)encephalopathynormalnormalnegativeNoneCR (25d)925/Ffever, cough,
pharyngalgiaheadache, vertigo (3d)encephalopathyNEnormalinfluenza BACVCR(7d)1030/Mfeverlimb numbness, slurred language
(2d)encephalopathynormalnormalnegativeNoneCR(12d)1130/Ffever, nasal congestionheadache, delirious behavior (5d)encephalitisnormalnormalEB
virusACV, DexCR (7d)1213/Mfeverheadache, disturbance of consciousness, seizure, meningeal irritation sign (1d)meningoencephalolitisslow
BACC: 73negativeACV, PB, IVIG, antibioticsCR (6d)1333/FnonevertigoencephalopathynormalnormalnegativeNoneCR (14d)1425/Fcough,
pharyngalgiaheadache (3d)encephalopathyNENEnegativeACVCR (10d)1515/Mfeverheadache (1d)encephalitisnormalCC: 19negativeACV, DexCR (15d) CNS
central nervous system, EEG electroencephalogram, CSF cerebrospinal fluid, BA basic activity, CR complete recovery, NE not examined, CC cell
counting (cells/uL), MPSL methylprednisolone, IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin, ACV acyclovir, MV mechanical ventilation, CBZ carbamazepine,
SL slurred language, Dex dexamethasone, PB phenobarbital These patients included 9 males and 6 females, and their age at diagnostic time
varied from 13 to 32 years (average 25.6 ± 7.98). Fever preceded neurological symptoms in 13 patients. Eight patients initially had other
cold symptoms before the onset of neurological symptoms. The cold symptoms included cough (5/8), pharyngalgia (4/8), nasal congestion (3/8),
and myalgias (2/8). Viral pathogens were identified in 4 of 15 patients, including influenza A or B (positive PCR in nasopharyngeal swab),
herpesvirus-6 (increased IgM antibody), and Epstein-Barr virus (positive PCR in CSF). The onset of neurological symptoms ranged from day 1
to 6 of the febrile illness. The most common neurological symptom is headache (12/15), followed by disturbance of consciousness (4/15),
vertigo (4/15), seizure (2/15), delirious behavior (2/15), slurred language (2/15), ataxia (1/15), tremor (1/15), and limb numbness (1/15).
Two patients were treated with mechanical ventilation. Two patients had received antiepileptic drugs (phenobarbital for case 2 and
carbamazepine for case 12) after the time of MRI study. Analysis of CSF revealed pleocytosis in 5 of 14 examined patients but normal glucose
and protein levels. EEG showed slow basic activity characteristic of encephalitis/encephalopathy in 4 of 9 examined patients. The
therapeutic regimens were variable (e.g. acyclovir for 11 patients, corticosteroids for 6 patients, and IVIG administration for 3 patients),
even 4 patients were not administrated purposeful treatments. Thirteen patients clinically recovered completely within 1 month (9 patients
within 2 weeks after the onset of neurological symptoms) without any neurological sequelae, but 2 patients who were required mechanical
ventilation had severe neurological sequelae. MRI characteristics In all of patients, the initial MRI study was performed within 1 week of
the onset of prodromal febrile illness (Table 2). On axial images, the lesion was extended irregularly into the lateral portion of SCC in 2
patients (Fig. 1) and ovoid in the center of the SCC in the other patients (case 1, 3, 4, 5, and 7–15) (Fig. 2). There was no obvious
correlation between the shape of SCC lesion and the scan date, neurological symptoms (presence or absence of seizures, date of complete
recovery, with or without sequelea), or laboratory findings. The initial MRI features showed homogeneously restricted diffusion with
hyperintense on DWI and decreased ADC values in SCC lesions. The lesions of SCC were homogeneously slight hyperintense on T2WI, while the
lesions can be isointense to slight hypointense on T1WI. There was no enhancement of the SCC lesion after gadolinium administration in any
of the 7 patients who received enhanced MRI. The SCC abnormalities of all 15 patients disappeared at follow-up MRI studies performed 10 to
32 days after the first MRI study. In at least 4 patients (case 1, 2, 7, 10), the SCC lesions disappeared before clinical symptoms reached
stability or complete recovery.Table 2MRI characteristics of RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathypatient no.initial MRIfollow-
up MRIscan date1 lesionshapeT2WIT1WIGdDWIADCDTIscan date2 scan date2 1day 5SCCovoidHsLNEHLNEday 12none2day 7SCCextendedsHsLnoneHLLday
16none3day 4SCCovoidHLNEHLNEday 10none4day 5SCCovoidsHINEHLNEday 12none5day 3SCCovoidHsLnoneHLNEday 11none6day 4SCCovoidsHINEHLNEday
28none7day 5SCCovoidsHsLNEHLNEday 32none8day 2SCCovoidsHINEHLNEday 27none9day 3SCCovoidHLnoneHLNEday 14none10day 3SCCextendedsHsLNEHLNEday
10none11day 5SCCovoidsHInoneHLNEday 25none12day 6SCCovoidsHsLnoneHLNEday 15none13day 1SCCovoidsHINEHLNEday 17none14day
4SCCovoidsHsLnoneHLNEday 14none15day 3SCCovoidHLnoneHLNEday 16none scan date 1 from the initial symptoms, scan date 2from the initial MRI.
T2W T2-weighted image, T1WI T1-weighted image, Gd gadolinium enhancement, DWI diffusion weighted imaging, ADC apparent diffusion
coefficient, DTI diffusion tensor imaging, SCC splenium of the corpus callosum, H high intensity, L low intensity, I isointensity, sH slight
high intensity, sL slight low intensity, NE not examined Clinical features Of the 23 patients with restricted diffusion on isolated lesion
in SCC, 15 patients met the criteria for RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy and 8 patients were excluded from the study due
to the following reasons: 6 had no follow-up MRI study; 1 had lesions in both SCC and bilateral white matters; 1 was associated with
possible epilepsy-related RESLES due to withdrawal of antiepileptic agents. The clinical data and radiological images of 15 patients were
reviewed by the co-authors together. The clinical findings of 15 patients were summarized in Table 1.Table 1Clinical data of patients with
RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathypatient no.age/sexinitial symptomCNS manifestation (onset day)CNS
diagnosisEEGCSFpathogenstherapyprognosis (day)115/Mfeverheadache (2d)encephalopathyslow BAnormalnegativeNoneCR (14d)223/Mfever, nasal
congestion, pharyngalgiaheadache, seizure, disturbance of consciousness, meningeal irritation sign (6d)meningoencephalitisNECC: 20influenza
AMPSL, IVIG, ACV, MV, CBZ, antibiotics,vegetative state327/Ffever, coughheadache, ataxia, slurred language
(2d)encephalopathyNEnormalnegativeDex, ACVCR (9d)438/Mfever, nasal congestion, coughheadache, vertigo
(1d)encephalopathyNEnormalherpesvirus-6ACVCR (11d)526/Mfever, myalgiasheadache, disturbance of consciousness (2d)encephalitisslow
BACC:110negativeACV, Dex, antibioticsCR (10d)631/Mfever, pharyngalgiavertigo (3d)encephalopathyslow BAnormalnegativeACV, antibioticsCR
(20d)716/Mfever, coughheadache, delirious behavior, disturbance of consciousness (2d)encephalitisNECC: 15negativeMPSL, IVIG, ACV,
MV,agrypnocoma837/Ffever, myalgiasheadache, tremor (1d)encephalopathynormalnormalnegativeNoneCR (25d)925/Ffever, cough,
pharyngalgiaheadache, vertigo (3d)encephalopathyNEnormalinfluenza BACVCR(7d)1030/Mfeverlimb numbness, slurred language
(2d)encephalopathynormalnormalnegativeNoneCR(12d)1130/Ffever, nasal congestionheadache, delirious behavior (5d)encephalitisnormalnormalEB
virusACV, DexCR (7d)1213/Mfeverheadache, disturbance of consciousness, seizure, meningeal irritation sign (1d)meningoencephalolitisslow
BACC: 73negativeACV, PB, IVIG, antibioticsCR (6d)1333/FnonevertigoencephalopathynormalnormalnegativeNoneCR (14d)1425/Fcough,
pharyngalgiaheadache (3d)encephalopathyNENEnegativeACVCR (10d)1515/Mfeverheadache (1d)encephalitisnormalCC: 19negativeACV, DexCR (15d) CNS
central nervous system, EEG electroencephalogram, CSF cerebrospinal fluid, BA basic activity, CR complete recovery, NE not examined, CC cell
counting (cells/uL), MPSL methylprednisolone, IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin, ACV acyclovir, MV mechanical ventilation, CBZ carbamazepine,
SL slurred language, Dex dexamethasone, PB phenobarbital Clinical data of patients with RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy
CNS central nervous system, EEG electroencephalogram, CSF cerebrospinal fluid, BA basic activity, CR complete recovery, NE not examined, CC
cell counting (cells/uL), MPSL methylprednisolone, IVIG intravenous immunoglobulin, ACV acyclovir, MV mechanical ventilation, CBZ
carbamazepine, SL slurred language, Dex dexamethasone, PB phenobarbital These patients included 9 males and 6 females, and their age at
diagnostic time varied from 13 to 32 years (average 25.6 ± 7.98). Fever preceded neurological symptoms in 13 patients. Eight patients
initially had other cold symptoms before the onset of neurological symptoms. The cold symptoms included cough (5/8), pharyngalgia (4/8),
nasal congestion (3/8), and myalgias (2/8). Viral pathogens were identified in 4 of 15 patients, including influenza A or B (positive PCR in
nasopharyngeal swab), herpesvirus-6 (increased IgM antibody), and Epstein-Barr virus (positive PCR in CSF). The onset of neurological
symptoms ranged from day 1 to 6 of the febrile illness. The most common neurological symptom is headache (12/15), followed by disturbance of
consciousness (4/15), vertigo (4/15), seizure (2/15), delirious behavior (2/15), slurred language (2/15), ataxia (1/15), tremor (1/15), and
limb numbness (1/15). Two patients were treated with mechanical ventilation. Two patients had received antiepileptic drugs (phenobarbital
for case 2 and carbamazepine for case 12) after the time of MRI study. Analysis of CSF revealed pleocytosis in 5 of 14 examined patients but
normal glucose and protein levels. EEG showed slow basic activity characteristic of encephalitis/encephalopathy in 4 of 9 examined patients.
The therapeutic regimens were variable (e.g. acyclovir for 11 patients, corticosteroids for 6 patients, and IVIG administration for 3
patients), even 4 patients were not administrated purposeful treatments. Thirteen patients clinically recovered completely within 1 month (9
patients within 2 weeks after the onset of neurological symptoms) without any neurological sequelae, but 2 patients who were required
mechanical ventilation had severe neurological sequelae. MRI characteristics In all of patients, the initial MRI study was performed within
1 week of the onset of prodromal febrile illness (Table 2). On axial images, the lesion was extended irregularly into the lateral portion of
SCC in 2 patients (Fig. 1) and ovoid in the center of the SCC in the other patients (case 1, 3, 4, 5, and 7–15) (Fig. 2). There was no
obvious correlation between the shape of SCC lesion and the scan date, neurological symptoms (presence or absence of seizures, date of
complete recovery, with or without sequelea), or laboratory findings. The initial MRI features showed homogeneously restricted diffusion
with hyperintense on DWI and decreased ADC values in SCC lesions. The lesions of SCC were homogeneously slight hyperintense on T2WI, while
the lesions can be isointense to slight hypointense on T1WI. There was no enhancement of the SCC lesion after gadolinium administration in
any of the 7 patients who received enhanced MRI. The SCC abnormalities of all 15 patients disappeared at follow-up MRI studies performed 10
to 32 days after the first MRI study. In at least 4 patients (case 1, 2, 7, 10), the SCC lesions disappeared before clinical symptoms
reached stability or complete recovery.Table 2MRI characteristics of RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathypatient no.initial
MRIfollow-up MRIscan date1 lesionshapeT2WIT1WIGdDWIADCDTIscan date2 scan date2 1day 5SCCovoidHsLNEHLNEday 12none2day
7SCCextendedsHsLnoneHLLday 16none3day 4SCCovoidHLNEHLNEday 10none4day 5SCCovoidsHINEHLNEday 12none5day 3SCCovoidHsLnoneHLNEday 11none6day
4SCCovoidsHINEHLNEday 28none7day 5SCCovoidsHsLNEHLNEday 32none8day 2SCCovoidsHINEHLNEday 27none9day 3SCCovoidHLnoneHLNEday 14none10day
3SCCextendedsHsLNEHLNEday 10none11day 5SCCovoidsHInoneHLNEday 25none12day 6SCCovoidsHsLnoneHLNEday 15none13day 1SCCovoidsHINEHLNEday
17none14day 4SCCovoidsHsLnoneHLNEday 14none15day 3SCCovoidHLnoneHLNEday 16none scan date 1 from the initial symptoms, scan date 2from the
initial MRI. T2W T2-weighted image, T1WI T1-weighted image, Gd gadolinium enhancement, DWI diffusion weighted imaging, ADC apparent
diffusion coefficient, DTI diffusion tensor imaging, SCC splenium of the corpus callosum, H high intensity, L low intensity, I isointensity,
sH slight high intensity, sL slight low intensity, NE not examined MRI characteristics of RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy
scan date 1 from the initial symptoms, scan date 2from the initial MRI. T2W T2-weighted image, T1WI T1-weighted image, Gd gadolinium
enhancement, DWI diffusion weighted imaging, ADC apparent diffusion coefficient, DTI diffusion tensor imaging, SCC splenium of the corpus
callosum, H high intensity, L low intensity, I isointensity, sH slight high intensity, sL slight low intensity, NE not examined In this
study, we described the clinical characteristics and outcomes in 15 patients with RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy in
mainland China. These patients initially presented with febrile illness, and then had CNS manifestations after several days. Due to the
limits of pathogens and CSF examinations, 6 patients can be considered as encephalitis, while 9 other patients can be only diagnosed as
infection-associated encephalopathy [2, 14]. However, all patients had a complete radiological regression of the isolated SCC lesion within
several weeks. Almost all patients with RESLES could be complete recovery without neurological sequelae after the acute disease course [1,
2]. Therefore, RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy was also known as a type of clinically mild encephalitis/encephalopathy
[2, 14]. However, we found two patients (case 2 and 7), who required ventilator supporting in the acute period of disease course, had
persistent comatose state and poor prognosis, even though the abnormal lesions disappeared within 1 month. Through detailed clinical
investigations, the typical evidences of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), multiple sclerosis (MS), autoimmune encephalitis,
vasculitis of central nervous system, and various metabolic or toxic encephalopathies were not found in the two patients. Although some rare
underlying disorders can not be completely excluded, the clinical pictures of the two patients conformed to the diagnosis of RESLES
associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy. Therefore, RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy should not be simply considered
as a mild clinic-radiological disorder with an excellent prognosis, particularly in patients required ventilator supporting in acute stage
of disease course. Due to the insufficient number of patients, there had been no evidence-based therapeutic regimen for RESLES associated
with encephalitis/encephalopathy. According to the descriptions of literatures, the commonest prescriptions included acyclovir, antibiotics,
anti-epileptic drugs, corticosteroids, and IVIG [2, 17]. We also found that the treatment can change from one case to other case in our
observational patients; even 4 cases with good prognosis had not been administrated any purposeful treatments. The pathogenesis of the
selective splenial lesion is not fully understood in RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy. Multiple etiologies are considered
involvements into the splenial lesion [2, 18, 19]. Therefore, as a distinct radiological spectrum disorder, cerebral MRI still is the first
choice to identify lesions of the SCC, particularly to detect early changes, and helps interpret the nature of the lesion . The SCC lesions
consistently showed a homogeneous and reversible pattern on DWI, differentiating these lesions from persistent ischemia, where ADC reduction
with subsequent reversal is uncommon. Our cases showed reversible DWI and ADC reduction supporting that cytotoxic edema of the SCC is an
important mechanism in this condition. Interestedly, we found the SCC lesion presented with decreased fractional anisotropy values in the
initial MRI scanning, which was different from the findings described by other cases [20, 21]. The decreased fractional anisotropy values in
areas of diffusion restriction may indicate the disarrangement of water molecule motivation along the axonal fibers, which also may indicate
the destruction of bridge architecture associated with neurological deficits in the patient. However, the clinical significance between
fractional anisotropy value and prognosis should be further investigated in more cases. In addition, some cases with slightly tinny
hyperintense on T2 and DWI had severe clinical course and poor outcomes, but other cases with obvious hyperintense on T2 and DWI presented
with slight clinical course. The phenomenon might indicate that the intensity and formation of SCC lesion were not closely associated with
the clinical features. Since a few patients with ADEM can present with isolated SCC lesion in early stage of disease course , ADEM should be
a differential diagnosis of RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy. ADEM is an immune inflammatory disorder, which is clinically
characterized as seizures, focal neurological signs, disturbance of consciousness, and recovery after immunomodulatory therapy. MRI in ADEM
usually shows multiple foci of T1 and T2 prolongation with enhancement in bilateral or asymmetric subcortical white matters . Therefore, we
excluded a case with lesions both SCC and bilateral white matters in order to obtain a more strict clinical diagnosis, although some
patients with RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy were well described with additional white matter lesions . The lesions of
ADEM usually evolve over weeks to months and disappear only after several months . However, our patients developed neurological symptoms
quickly after the onset of febrile illness. The SCC lesions in these patients had no contrast enhancement, and most of them disappeared
completely within month. Therefore, the SCC lesions in our patients are clinically and radiologically different from those of ADEM.
Autoimmune encephalitis such as anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor encephalitis also should be differentiated . Corpus callosum can
be affected in very few patients with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis, while the lesions were not quickly reversible diffusion restriction
with reduced apparent diffusion coefficient in patients who usually were young female with ovarian teratoma . The major limitations of our
work were its retrospective nature and relatively small sample size. A larger prospective study with long-term follow-up would be necessary
to corroborate our findings. RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy is a distinct disorder, which usually affects children or
young adults with febrile illness. Although RESLES associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy is a reversible syndrome with an excellent
prognosis in most patients, a few patients required ventilator supporting at the early stage might have severe neurological sequelae.
Reversible signal changes on DWI and ADC are identified in all of patients, but fractional anisotropy values can be decreased in severe
patient with neurological sequelae. This study was approved by the ethics committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University.
Written consent for publication had obtained from patients or their parents. The detailed descriptions about those patients can be available
in a Additional file 1. Additional file 1: Reversible splenial lesion syndrome associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy presenting with
great clinical heterogeneity. (52 kb) Reversible splenial lesion syndrome associated with encephalitis/encephalopathy presenting with great
clinical heterogeneity. (52 kb) Reversible splenial lesion syndrome splenium of the corpus callosum magnetic resonance image
electroencephalogram cerebrospinal fluid polymerase chain reaction T2 weighted images T1 weighted images diffusion wighted imaging apparent
diffusion coefficient intravenous immunoglobulin extractable nucler antigen anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody myelin basic protein acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis multiple sclerosis N-methyl-D-aspartate Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions ZY data collection and manuscript composition; ZJ clinical follow-up and helped data analysis; ZL drafted
the manuscript and gave critical suggestions; ZZ intensive cure for the two severe patients and helped data analysis; ZM radiological data
analysis; LX contributed a patient and gave critical suggestions; LX and WH neurological evaluation of the patient and critical suggestions
for manuscript composition; HD design the study, manuscript composition, and corresponding author. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. We appreciated patients and their families for their cooperation. We also thank Ms. Andrews Vidita helping us polish language.
The design of study and collection work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.81260194 and 81460199).
