The simultaneous presence of a heterozygous β-thalassemia with α-gene triplication may cause anything from a thalassemia trait to
thalassemia intermedia of mild to moderate severity. An 8-month-old ethnic Gypsy male infant with failure to thrive from birth, mild
jaundice and splenomegaly. Clinical signs were compatible with severe microcytic anemia requiring bi-monthly blood transfusions. The
β-thalassemia gene analysis found homozygous mutation IVS-I-110 (G>A) (c.93-21G>A) in intron 1 of the hemoglobin beta globin gene and a non-
pathogenic sequence variant (single nucleotide polimorfism (SNP) Rs1609812). In addition, the patient had α gene triplication (αααanti
3.7/αα) caused by double heterozygosity for a 3.7 kb fragment that contained only the hemoglobin alpha globin gene-2 gene. This finding led
to screening and follow up in first-degree relatives, twin brothers and a sister and parents to provide them with appropriate genetic
counseling. Nowadays, new horizons could open a new therapeutic management until definitive cure of these diseases through gene therapy or
mutation-specific genome editing. Genetic testing can provide an early diagnosis and facilitates the search for a suitable donor for
transplantation. Thalassemia syndromes are a group of hemoglobinopathies characterized by gene defects that disrupt hemoglobin synthesis.
β-thalassemia results from insufficient (β+) or absent (β0) synthesis of normal hemoglobin chains. The molecular basis involves mutations in
β-globin genes (mostly point mutations). Most patients are from Mediterranean countries, Southeastern Europe, Arab and Asian countries .
Hematological changes do not show up before patients are 3–6 months old [1, 2]. The imbalance between the α- and β-globin chains is central
to the pathophysiology of β-thalassemia. In homozygous β-thalassemia, the excess of α-globin chains precipitates on the membranes of the red
cell precursors of the bone marrow causing hemolysis, ineffective erythropoiesis and anemia [3, 4]. There are still some unknown aspects in
the relationship between genotype and phenotype in thalassemias, such as the simultaneous presence of heterozygous β-thalassemia with triple
α-gene. This combination may cause anything from a thalassemia trait to thalassemia intermedia of mild to moderate severity, as in the case
presented here. An 8-month-old male infant, Portuguese of gypsy ethnic origin, who presented with marked failure to thrive from birth, mild
jaundice of the skin and splenomegaly (greatest longitudinal diameter was 87 mm at 7 months). An initial differential diagnosis was made to
distinguish between hemoglobinopathies and other types of anemia (deficiency anemia, hemolytic anemia, erythroblastopenia). The clinical
signs were compatible with severe microcytic anemia, requiring bi-monthly blood transfusions from the time of diagnosis. Admission to
hospital was needed on several occasions due to infectious episodes (gastroenteritis due to Salmonella, Parvovirus B19 seroconversion) and
for the implantation of an intravenous (IV) reservoir because of the transfusion requirements. Blood parameters were analyzed with the
COULTER LH 780 Series (Beckman), a hematology analyzer used to count and determine the size of blood cells. Hemoglobin analysis and the
quantification of hemoglobin (Hb) A2 and Hb F were performed using Minicap Flex Piercing (Sebia) capillary electrophoresis. The analysis of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), taken from peripheral blood with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), was performed using proteolytic
digestion followed by purification and ethanol precipitation. Next, spectrophotometry was applied to quantify the obtained DNA. All coding
exons and adjacent intronic regions of the HBB gene (hemoglobin beta globin gene) as well as the CACC-box (cytosine-adenine-cytosine-
cytosine-box) in the proximal promoter region and 5′UTR and 3′UTR regions were amplified using PCR (polymerase chain reaction). In the
testing for α-thalassemia, hybridization of the DNA that was obtained was performed using specific probes that are complementary to
chromosomal region 16 p13.3, which contains the HBA (hemoglobin alpha globin) gene cluster. Subsequently PCR amplification of the genes
located in the HBA gene cluster was performed using the MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) technique. Lastly,
sequencing of both strands of the amplified fragments was performed and the sequences were visualized by capillary electrophoresis using the
Applied Biosystems© 3500 Dx Genetic Analyzer. Labgenetics (Laboratorio de Genética Clínica S.L.) performed the genetic testing to diagnose
α- and β-thalassemia. The patient’s laboratory findings when he was 8 months old were as follows: microcytic anemia without other laboratory
abnormalities, with Hb 6.2 g/dL, hematocrit (Hct) 20 %, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 74.40 fL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) 22.90 pg,
without iron deficiency. HbA2 1.7 %, HbF 90.0 % (see Fig. 1). Biochemical values revealed: lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 49 mg/dL, total
bilirubin (TBIL) 1.40 mg/dL, direct bilirubin (DBIL) 0.31 mg/dL and reticulocytosis (4.14 %) (see Table 1).Fig. 1HPLC images of (a) index
case, mother and father, (b) sister and brothers (twins)Table 1Analytical results of the index case and familyIndex case (8 months old)Twin
1Twin 2SisterMotherFatherRev. valuesGender♂♂♂♀♀♂–α genotypeαααanti 3.7/αααααanti3.7/αααanti3.7 αααanti3.7/αααanti3.7
Αααanti3.7/-αααanti3.7/αααααanti3.7/αααanti3.7 –β genotypeβ+/β+ β+/N (normal)β+/N (normal)–β+/N (normal)β+/N
(normal)–HbA21.75.65.705.54.75.4–HbF90.03.103.202.601.12.3–Hb (gr/dL)6.210.89.310.08.511.213.2–18.0Hct
(%)20.034.929.831.927.535.939.0–51.0Red blood cells (×109/L)2.685.925.115.474.005.894.32–5.66MCV
(fL)74.4058.8058.2058.4068.8060.9080.0–98.0MCH (pg)22.9018.2018.2018.3021.301927.30–32.60Reticulocytes
(%)4.141.572.302.703.65–0.80–2.50Leukocytes (×109/L)16.010.912.16.408.68.43.7–9.5Platelets (×109/L)150351398238263230125–450Ferritin
(ng/mL)99.964.295.8147.716.2743.412–300LDH (mg/dL)449350388369233–180–430Total bilirubin (mg/dL)1.400.371.011.350.60–0.30–1.20Direct
bilirubin (mg/dL)0.310.09–0.26––0.0–0.20Clinical signs and symptomsSevere anemia, failure to thrive, splenomegalyMild/moderate
anemiaMild/moderate anemiaMild anemiaModerate anemia, menorrhagiaMild anemia– HPLC images of (a) index case, mother and father, (b) sister
and brothers (twins) Analytical results of the index case and family The β-thalassemia gene analysis found homozygous mutation IVS-I-110
(G>A), (c.93-21G>A), in intron 1 of the HBB gene and a non-pathogenic sequence variant [SNP (Single nucleotide polimorfism) Rs1609812], with
heterozygous mutation IVS-II-666 (T>C) in intron 2 of the HBB gene. Mutation IVS-I-110 (G>A), (c.93-21G>A), in intron 1 of the HBB gene can
cause protein splicing defects, leading to aberrant mRNA (ribonucleic acid) and thus result in the synthesis of a non-functional protein.
The presence of this homozygous mutation implies a diagnosis of β-thalassemia major. The presence of α gene triplication in heterozygosis
has no effect on the synthesis of α globin chains in hemoglobin and subjects are usually clinically asymptomatic. However, the combination
of a triplicated α-globin gene together with heterozygous β-thalassemia may produce a thalassemia intermedia phenotype, as it increases the
imbalance between the α- and β-globin chains [4, 5]. At the age of 2 years the child required monthly transfusions and had marked failure to
thrive (weight and height below P3, head circumference P10), splenomegaly and required chelation therapy with Deferasirox EXJADE®
(deferasirox) (10 mg/kg/day) as maintained iron overload was found. The study of the whole family is normally done routinely. The subject
had two twin brothers (fraternal twins) aged 5 years, who were clinically asymptomatic at the time the analysis of the index case was
performed (see Fig. 2, the family gave its consent to carrying out the family tree as part of routine study). Laboratory tests revealed they
had mild microcytic anemia (Hb 9.3–10.8 g/dL, Hct 29.8–34.9 %, MCV 58.80 fL, MCH 18.20–22.90 pg) (see Table 1; Fig. 1b). Gene testing in
both revealed that they had heterozygous mutation IVS-I-110 (G>A), (c.93-21G>A), in intron 1 of the HBB gene and were homozygous for α-gene
triplication (αααanti 3.7/αααanti 3.7).Fig. 2Pedigree with the results for family members Pedigree with the results for family members The
heterozygous mutation IVS-I-110 (G>A), (c.93-21G>A), in intron 1 of the HBB gene can result in the synthesis of a non-functional aberrant
protein. This nucleotide change has been described as a mutation associated with the development of β-thalassemia. The homozygous α-gene
triplication (αααanti 3.7/αααanti 3.7) causes an increase in the synthesis of the α-globin chain of hemoglobin, leading to a slight increase
in the level of hemoglobin in the blood and resulting in an imbalance in α- and β-chain hemoglobin synthesis. The combination of a
homozygous or heterozygous triplicated α-globin gene together with heterozygous β-thalassemia would produce a thalassemia intermedia
phenotype, as the imbalance between the α- and β-globin chains would increase [4, 5]. The subject also had a 9-year-old sister (see Fig. 2)
with thalassemia minor who was clinically asymptomatic, she had a microcytic anemia without other laboratory abnormalities (Hb 10.0 g/dL,
Hct 31.9 %, MCV 58.0 fL, MCH 18.30 pg, HbA2 5.5 %, HbF 2.6 %, HbA 91.9) (see Table 1; Fig. 1a), and she had at least a triplicated alpha
globin gene in heterozygosis. The mother was diagnosed with thalassemia minor and she also presented with severe iron deficiency because of
menorrhagia that often needed to be treated with intravenous iron (Hb 8.5 g/dL, Hct 27.5, MCV 68.8 fL, MCH 21.30 pg, HbA2 4.9 % and HbF
1.4 %) (see Table 1; Fig. 1a, b). The genetic study revealed heterozygosity for the IVS-I-110 (G>A) (c.93-21G>A) mutation in intron 1 of the
HBB gene and heterozygosity for alpha-gene triplication (ααα3.7/αα). The father was clinically asymptomatic and laboratory tests showed he
had mild microcytic anemia (Hb 11.2 g/dL, Hct 35.9 %, MCV 60.90 fL, MCH 19 pg) (see Table 1; Fig. 1a). He had heterozygosity for the
IVS-I-110 (G>A) (c.93-21G>A) mutation in intron 1 of the HBB gene and was homozygous for alpha-gene triplication (ααα3.7/ααα3.7). Blood
samples were taken from parents and sibilings as a part of routine care of patient. Parents signed informed consent for molecular genetic
studies for themselves and their children. The index case presented with failure to thrive (he was below the percentile for his sex and age)
and was diagnosed with severe microcytic anemia. His transfusion requirements have increased and at present are required on a monthly basis.
At the age two he started chelation therapy with deferasirox (10 mg/kg/day) due to the progressive increase in serum ferritin levels and
other parameters indicative of iron overload. Chelation therapy for the treatment of iron overload in patients with β-thalassemia is
indicated from the age of 2 years, following lab tests to rule out changes in renal and liver function . This treatment is well tolerated by
the patient, and can be given orally without need of discontinuation of other treatment; in subsequent follow up showed no effect on
creatinine and transaminase levels. In adition, this drug dose has been adjusted to the subject’s weight, with good response to ferritin
levels, but it has not been made liver MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). Given the patient’s condition and since β-thalassemia major was
confirmed by genetic testing, we decided to perform an HLA study in family members in order to undertake allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation from a related donor. The index case was found to be an identical HLA match to his twin brothers, but screening for
hemoglobinopathies and genetic testing found that the brothers had heterozygous β-thalassemia together with α-gene triplication (see
Fig. 1b; Table 1). For this reason it was decided that the brothers would not be suitable donors for a hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation as this combination of inherited factors involves a broad clinical spectrum that is highly unpredictable, so at this time we
cannot be certain about the clinical implications of the donors also being affected by the condition, despite being asymptomatic at present.
The search for an unrelated donor was made in the Bone Marrow Donors Registry (Registro de donantes de médula ósea, REDMO) and a suitable
candidate was found. Although there have been numerous advances in the molecular characterization of thalassemia, at present certain aspects
of the relationship between genotype and phenotype remain unknown; one of these is the simultaneous presence of a heterozygous β-thalassemia
with α-gene triplication. This interaction may cause anything from a thalassemia trait to thalassemia intermedia of mild to moderate
severity [3, 4, 7]. However, the index case has the homozygous mutation IVS-I-110 (G>A), (c.93-21G>A) and the presence of α gene
triplication in heterozygosis, this genetic association clinically manifested as severe anemia. And his brothers presented the heterozygous
mutation IVS-I-110 (G>A) and α gene triplication, and they have an anemia less severe. Perhaps we should consider the role of the mutation
IVS-I-110 (G>A) and its association with α gene triplication in terms of clinical character. The insufficient growth may have many causes
and a transfusion per month may be normal in a major patient . β-thalassemia is a benign congenital blood disorder, but patients with β
thalassemia major need regular blood transfusions throughout their whole lives and this leads to iron overload that causes progressive organ
dysfunction. With the currently available treatments, over 80 % of subjects have a life expectancy of more than 35 years [9, 10]. Still, the
only curative treatment for the disease is hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Subjects who have an HLA-identical healthy sibling are
candidates for transplantation, although if this is not the case, at present unrelated donor transplant outcomes are very promising,
expanding the possibilities for these patients [10, 11]. These genetic and clinical findings have important implications for prenatal
screening and genetic counseling programs. Families in which heterozygosity for α-gene triplication and β-thalassemia coexists in both
parents may have a child with thalassemia intermedia or major. In our case, it is essential to provide adequate genetic counseling to the
family because of their family history for the disease, which in some cases has even required bone marrow transplantation (see Fig. 2). It
is also necessary to provide them with an explanation of the clinical implications of the disease and, in case of pregnancy, to offer them
the possibility of having prenatal genetic testing performed on the fetus . Mettananda et al. reported the reduction of α-globin expression
would ameliorate the clinical severity of patients with β-thalassemia. It seems that therapeutic regulation of α-globin expression is
feasible by RNA interference, epigenetic drug targeting, or genome editing. Therefore, exploring new horizons could open a new therapeutic
management until definitive cure of these diseases through gene therapy or mutation-specific genome editing . The simultaneous presence of a
heterozygous β-thalassemia with α-gene triplication may cause differences in the genotype-phenotype correlation this is why genetic testing
can provide an early diagnosis and facilitates the search for a suitable donor for transplantation when needed (for example, of
hematopoietic stem cells). FYC: Substantial contributions to conception and design, or acquisition of data, and interpretation of data. Have
been involved in drafting the manuscript. Final approval of the version to be published. MVRF: Substantial contributions to conception and
design, or acquisition of data, and interpretation of data. Have been involved in drafting the manuscript and revising it. Final approval of
the version to be published. SIA: Substantial contributions to conception and design, or acquisition of data, and interpretation of data.
Have been involved in drafting the manuscript and revising it. Final approval of the version to be published. IPS: Have been involved in
drafting the manuscript and revising it. Final approval of the version to be published. CRVI: Have been involved in drafting the manuscript
and revising it. Final approval of the version to be published. We thank the Department of Genetics, Pediatrics and Hematology of Hospital
Universitario Miguel Servet in Zaragoza for its collaboration with this research and Labgenetics S.L. company for the genetic diagnosis
study of α and β thalassemia. Can be consulted Bone Marrow Donors Registry (Registro de donantes de médula ósea, REDMO). The authors declare
that they have no competing interests Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patient for participate and publication
of this Case Report. Not applicable. Parents signed informed consent for molecular genetic studies for themselves and their children. Blood
samples were taken from parents and sibilings as a part of routine care of patient.
