Tracheobronchial stenosis is a known complication of endobronchial tuberculosis. Despite antituberculous and steroid therapy, the
development of bronchial stenosis is usually irreversible and requires airway patency to be restored by either bronchoscopic or surgical
interventions. We report the use of balloon dilatation and topical mitomycin-C to successful restore airway patency. We present a 24-year
old lady with previous pulmonary tuberculosis and laryngeal tuberculosis in 2007 and 2013 respectively who presented with worsening dyspnoea
and stridor. She had total left lung collapse with stenosis of both the upper trachea and left main bronchus. She underwent successful
bronchoscopic balloon and manual rigid tube dilatation with topical mitomycin-C application over the stenotic tracheal segment. A second
bronchoscopic intervention was performed after 20 weeks for the left main bronchus stenosis with serial balloon dilatation and topical
mitomycin-C application. These interventions led to significant clinical and radiographic improvements. This case highlights that balloon
dilatation and topical mitomycin-C application should be considered in selected patients with tracheobronchial stenosis following
endobronchial tuberculosis, avoiding airway stenting and invasive surgical intervention. Endobronchial tuberculosis (EBTB) is a consequence
of pulmonary TB (PTB) extending into the endobronchial or endotracheal wall, and its incidence has been reported to range from 6 to 50 % of
cases . EBTB can affect any region of the tracheobronchial tree, with higher rates of central EBTB (proximal to lobar bronchi) compared to
segmental bronchi . The true incidence and complications of EBTB are unknown as routine bronchoscopy is not performed in all patients with
PTB. The clinical presentation of EBTB can be non-specific with cough, dyspnoea and stridor; however patients may also be asymptomatic.
Generally, stridor occurs when the proximal airway diameter in an adult diminishes to approximately 6 mm . Bronchial stenosis and strictures
are sequelae of EBTB and may develop in up to 95 % of cases despite adequate antituberculous therapy [5, 6]. Eradication of the tubercle
bacilli is the primary goal of treatment for EBTB, similar to standard first line treatment approaches Corticosteroids have improved
clinical outcomes when used as an adjunct therapy in children, however this has not been shown to prevent bronchostenosis in adults and
clinical concerns about its immunosuppressive effects in this setting persist . Despite antituberculous and steroid therapy, the development
of bronchial stenosis or strictures is usually irreversible and therefore requires airway patency to be restored by either bronchoscopic or
surgical interventions . There are various bronchoscopic techniques including laser, balloon dilatation and stent insertion . We report a
female patient who had two previous episodes of tuberculosis complicated by multi-level fibrostenotic EBTB involving the left main bronchus
and the trachea. The left lung was successfully expanded following serial endoscopic treatment with subsequent use of mitomycin-C preventing
the need for an airway stent. A 24-year-old female presented with a 3-month history of worsening dyspnoea and stridor. She was unable to
climb one flight of stairs or walk more than 50 meters on a flat surface, requiring domiciliary oxygen therapy. She also had significant
loss of appetite and loss of weight. Her past medical history included acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smear-positive PTB in 2007 and laryngeal TB
in 2013 for which she completed 6 months of standard anti-tuberculous (anti-TB) regimen on both occasions. Respiratory examination revealed
tracheal deviation to the left, decreased chest expansion, reduced vocal fremitus and dullness to percussion of the left lung. Oxygen
saturation on room air was 95 %. On this presentation, sputum smear examination for AFB was negative. Flow volume (FV) loop was consistent
with fixed airway obstruction (Fig. 1a) with her best functional vital capacity (FVC) of 2.03 litres (58 % predicted). Chest radiograph
(Fig. 2a) and computed tomography (CT) scan of thorax (Fig. 3a) showed total left lung collapse. The CT thorax also revealed 1-cm segment of
tracheal stenosis (Fig. 4a) and left main bronchus (LMB) stenosis (Fig. 5a) with mediastinal shift to the left (Fig. 6a).Fig. 1FV loop pre-
and post-intervention. a FV loop showing flattening of inspiratory and expiratory limbs indicating fixed upper airway obstruction. b FV loop
at 36 weeks following intervention showed improvement of both the inspiratory and expiratory limbsFig. 2Chest radiograph pre- and post-
intervention. a Chest radiograph showed total left lung collapse. b Chest radiograph at 36 weeks following intervention illustrating re-
expansion of the left lung fieldFig. 3CT Thorax pre- and post-intervention. a Coronal view CT Thorax showed total left lung collapse. b
Coronal view CT Thorax at 36 weeks following intervention showing re-expansion of the left lungFig. 4CT Thorax pre- and post-intervention. a
Lateral view of a CT Thorax showing 1 cm of total stenosis at the upper one third of trachea. b Lateral view CT Thorax at 36 weeks following
successful interventionFig. 5Axial view of a CT Thorax at the main carina level pre- and post-intervention. a CT Thorax showed left main
bronchus stenosis with collapsed left lung. b CT Thorax at 36 weeks following intervention with residual left main bronchus stenosis and re-
expansion of the left lungFig. 6Axial view CT Thorax pre- and post-intervention. a CT Thorax showed mediastinal shift to the left. b CT
Thorax at 36 weeks following intervention showed normal location of the mediastinum FV loop pre- and post-intervention. a FV loop showing
flattening of inspiratory and expiratory limbs indicating fixed upper airway obstruction. b FV loop at 36 weeks following intervention
showed improvement of both the inspiratory and expiratory limbs Chest radiograph pre- and post-intervention. a Chest radiograph showed total
left lung collapse. b Chest radiograph at 36 weeks following intervention illustrating re-expansion of the left lung field CT Thorax pre-
and post-intervention. a Coronal view CT Thorax showed total left lung collapse. b Coronal view CT Thorax at 36 weeks following intervention
showing re-expansion of the left lung CT Thorax pre- and post-intervention. a Lateral view of a CT Thorax showing 1 cm of total stenosis at
the upper one third of trachea. b Lateral view CT Thorax at 36 weeks following successful intervention Axial view of a CT Thorax at the main
carina level pre- and post-intervention. a CT Thorax showed left main bronchus stenosis with collapsed left lung. b CT Thorax at 36 weeks
following intervention with residual left main bronchus stenosis and re-expansion of the left lung Axial view CT Thorax pre- and post-
intervention. a CT Thorax showed mediastinal shift to the left. b CT Thorax at 36 weeks following intervention showed normal location of the
mediastinum Flexible bronchoscopy revealed a web-like 90 % tracheal stenosis and the visualisation of airways distally from this point was
not possible. A clinical judgement of PTB reactivation was made based on the bronchoscopic appearance and the presence of constitutional
symptoms. The standard four anti-TB regimen was therefore commenced. Patient was then referred to an interventional pulmonology centre for
bronchoscopic intervention. The first intervention performed was sequential tracheal dilatation to 10 mm via controlled radial expansion
CRE® balloon (Boston Scientifics, USA) and mechanical dilatation with rigid bronchoscopy followed by mitomycin-C application (0.4 mg/ml)
with a total contact time of 8 min. The first intervention was successful, as bronchoscopic surveillance performed at 3, 8 and 16 weeks
(Fig. 7a) showed no recurrence of tracheal stenosis with a tracheal diameter of 10 mm. The airway distal to the tracheal stenosis became
accessible which subsequently revealed the LMB stenosis with a pinpoint opening as previously reported in the CT thorax. We then proceeded
with dilatation of the LMB.Fig. 7Bronchoscopic findings (a) during presentation showing stenotic upper tracheal segment. b 3 weeks c 8 weeks
and d 16 weeks post-intervention Bronchoscopic findings (a) during presentation showing stenotic upper tracheal segment. b 3 weeks c 8 weeks
and d 16 weeks post-intervention The second intervention was performed at 20 weeks and the stenosed LMB was dilated using a CRE® balloon at
8, 9 and 10 mm. At 26 weeks, the balloon dilatation was repeated with the adjuvant treatment of topical mitomycin-C application (0.4 mg/mls)
with the same contact time of 8 min. These procedures were repeated again at 36 weeks to re-examine further the LMB stenosis. There were no
immediate complications. Following these interventions, the patient showed significant and sustained improvement. The FV loop (Fig. 1b)
illustrated improvement in both inspiratory and expiratory limbs and the FVC increased to 2.91 litres (83 % predicted). Chest radiograph
(Fig. 2b) and CT thorax showed re-expansion of the left lung (Fig. 3b), tracheal patency (Fig. 4b) and the mediastinum back to its original
position (Fig. 6b). The patient is currently able to climb more than four flights of stairs and walk more than 1 kilometre without dyspnoea.
She had completed a total 9 months of anti-TB therapy. She no longer requires oxygen and is back to her usual daily activities. We report a
rare case of multiple level tracheobronchial stenoses secondary to endobronchial tuberculosis. The risk factors present include female
gender, symptom duration of more than 4 weeks and multiple previous episodes of PTB; these are significant predictors of EBTB . Our patient
had a unique presentation in which bronchoscopy revealed tracheal fibrostenosis as well as LMB involvement. These are both rare sites for
EBTB as current literature reports that the right upper lobe and right main bronchus are the most common sites [5, 6, 12]. Although
presentation of EBTB varies, patients are more commonly reported to present with cough and wheezing . Localised rhonchi on respiratory
examination should prompt the clinician to assess for the presence of an endobronchial lesion in which correlation of loop spirometry, CT
findings and bronchoscopy may aid the diagnosis. The involvement of the trachea was the reason for the patient’s rare presentation of
dyspnea and stridor. Simple tracheal stenosis can be treated endoscopically while complex stenosis should be evaluated for surgery . Various
bronchoscopic techniques include laser, cryosurgery, controlled heat application, balloon dilatation and stent insertion are available .
Persistent airway stenosis following balloon dilatation has been described especially if active inflammation, calcification and malacia are
evident. Patients who require more than one session of balloon dilatation may need more definitive treatment such as stenting or ablative
procedures . As there was no bronchomalacia evident in our patient, an airway stent was not inserted into the LMB to avoid long-term
complications associated with this foreign device. This option would be considered however, if the LMB stenosis re-occurred following
topical mitomycin-C application. The use of mitomycin-C as an adjunct therapy to bronchoscopic procedures in our case was influenced by
reports of successful treatment in patients with tracheal stenosis secondary to intubation [14, 15]. There are no controlled studies and
very few case reports in the literature describing the utility of mitomycin-C for trachea-bronchial stenosis secondary to EBTB. Two previous
reports had shown the success of topical mitomycin-C for obstructive granuloma and a 90 % occlusion of the upper trachea secondary to EBTB
[16, 17]. Mitomycin-C is an antineoplastic antibiotic agent that inhibits fibroblast proliferation and modulates wound healing and scarring.
Due to its teratogenic effects, use in a women of childbearing age woman should be coupled with contraceptive use. This patient was
successfully managed with clinical (symptoms and FV loop) and radiological improvements at short-term follow-up, despite having residual LMB
stenosis. As there was no bronchomalacia, an airway stent was not inserted to the LMB. This case report contributes to the current
literature and evidence base that balloon dilatation and topical mitomycin-C application should be considered in selected patients with
tracheobronchial stenosis post EBTB. Importantly, this technique might obviate the need for airway stenting and further invasive surgical
intervention. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. All materials are included in this
manuscript. endobronchial tuberculosis pulmonary tuberculosis left main bronchus acid fast bacilli flow volume functional vital capacity
computed tomography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MFAH is the main
author and corresponding author for this article. HH was involved in literature review. TMH, AYLB SHC and JAR edited and approved the final
version of the case report. All authors approved the final manuscript as submitted. We would like to acknowledge Prof Dato Dr. Raymond Azman
Ali, Dean of the Medical Faculty and the Director of the Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre.
