Clinically mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion (MERS) is a mild encephalopathy caused by various pathological
processes, but encephalopathy due to bacteria is rare. We report the case of a 45-year-old Japanese woman who on receiving chemotherapy for
advanced breast cancer developed an altered mental status and dysarthria soon after fever from infection of a subcutaneous implantable port.
Staphylococcus aureus was detected in her blood cultures. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an ovoid lesion in the central portion
of the splenium of the corpus callosum (SCC). Although hypotension was not observed, we diagnosed probable toxic shock syndrome (TSS) based
on fever (temperature: >38.9 °C), altered mental status, erythema, desquamation, thrombocytopenia, liver dysfunction, and creatine
phosphokinase elevation. We administered antimicrobial therapy and her neurological symptoms improved gradually. The lesion in the SCC
completely disappeared on MRI 7 days after disease onset. We diagnosed this case as MERS caused by S. aureus bacteremia with TSS. This is
the first report of such a case, and we suggest that when a TSS patient presents with neurological symptoms, the possibility of MERS should
be considered. Mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion (MERS) is a mild encephalopathy caused by various
pathological processes such as viral or bacterial infections, drugs, metabolic and electrolyte abnormalities, and trauma . It is
characterized by neurological symptoms such as consciousness, vertigo, and seizure. Several viruses (influenza virus, adenovirus, mumps
virus, varicella zoster virus [2, 3], rotavirus , measles virus , and hepatitis A virus ) and bacteria (Escherichia coli , Legionella
pneumophila , and Mycoplasma pneumoniae ) have been reported to cause MERS, but bacteria are rarely the cause [2, 3]. Staphylococcus aureus,
especially, is a very rare cause of MERS, and only one such case has been reported so far . Moreover, there are no reports on MERS
associated with toxic shock syndrome (TSS). We encountered a case of MERS caused by S. aureus bacteremia with TSS and report our findings in
this study. A 45-year-old Japanese woman had undergone chemotherapy for advanced breast cancer (TNM Classification for Breast Cancer,
T4N0M0; clinical Stage IIIb) for 2 years. She had a subcutaneous implantable port attached to her left subclavian vein and was receiving
vinorelbine 11 days before admission. A second dose of vinorelbine was administered 4 days before admission. She developed fever following
pain and swelling at the site of the implantable port 2 days before admission. She was suspected to have catheter-related bloodstream
infection and thus admitted to our hospital. The implantable port was removed and piperacillin/tazobactam was administered at 4.5 g every
8 h. On hospital day 2, altered mental status and dysarthria were observed. At the onset of neurological symptoms, her vital signs were as
follows: blood pressure, 109/63 mmHg; pulse, 96 bpm; respiratory rate, 26 bpm; and temperature, 39.5 °C. The Glasgow Coma Scale score for
consciousness was 13 (eye opening, 4; verbal response, 4; and best motor response, 5). No obvious paralysis was noted, although evaluation
of neurological symptoms was difficult because of disorders of consciousness. Conjunctival hyperemia was noted. Except for the subclavian
lesion at the site of the implantable port, no abnormalities of the skin, lung, heart, and abdomen were noted. The subclavian lesion was red
and swollen. Laboratory test results were as follows: white blood cell count 400/mm3; hemoglobin, 9.9 g/dl; platelet, 6.2 × 104/mm3; blood
urea nitrogen, 15 mg/dl; creatinine, 0.69 mg/dl; aspartate aminotransferase, 48 U/l; alanine aminotransferase, 26 U/l; lactate
dehydrogenase, 353 U/l; creatine phosphokinase, 1859 U/l; serum sodium, 130 mEq/l; serum potassium, 3.3 mEq/l; and C-reactive protein,
13.5 mg/dl (Table 1). Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an ovoid high-intensity lesion in the central portion of the SCC on
diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI, Fig. 1). Based on the MRI findings, septic embolus or cerebral infarction was considered because the
neurological symptoms occurred suddenly following fever due to catheter-related bloodstream infection. On the same day, gram-positive cocci
were detected in blood cultures. Therefore, on hospital day 2, piperacillin/tazobactam therapy was switched to cefepime and vancomycin. On
hospital day 4, methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) was detected in blood cultures. Nafcillin and oxacillin, the first treatment of
choice for MSSA-related diseases of the central nervous system, are not available in Japan. Therefore, cefepime was administered at 2 g
every 8 h.Table 1Laboratory data on hospital day 2ParameterRecorded valueStandard valueWhite blood cell
count0.40 × 109/L4.00–7.50 × 109/L Neutrophil0.30 × 109/L Monocyte0.01 × 109/L Lymphocyte0.09 × 109/LHemoglobin9.9 g/dL11.3–15.2 g/dLHematocrit35.8 %36–45 %Platelet6.2 × 109/L130–350 × 109/LC-
reactive protein13.5 mg/dL≤0.14 mg/dLTotal protein6.1 g/dL6.9–8.4 g/dLAlbumin2.9 g/dL3.9–5.1 g/dLAspartate aminotransferase48 U/L11–30
U/LAlanine aminotransferase26 U/L4–30 U/LLactate dehydrogenase353 U/L109–216 U/LCreatine phosphokinase1859 U/L40–150 U/LBlood nitrogen
urea15 mg/dL8–20 mg/dLCreatinine0.69 mg/dL0.63–1.03 mg/dLSodium138 mEq/L136–148 mEq/LPotassium4.2 mEq/L3.6–5.0 mEq/LGlucose124 mg/dl70–109 mg/dlFig.
1Head magnetic resonance imaging on admission day 2. a Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), b Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC). Head
magnetic resonance imaging revealed an ovoid lesion in the central portion of the splenium of the corpus callosum. The lesion appears as
reduced diffusion on DWI and has a low ADC value (red circles) Laboratory data on hospital day 2 Head magnetic resonance imaging on
admission day 2. a Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), b Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC). Head magnetic resonance imaging revealed an
ovoid lesion in the central portion of the splenium of the corpus callosum. The lesion appears as reduced diffusion on DWI and has a low ADC
value (red circles) The patient's altered mental status and dysarthria improved gradually. On hospital day 9, 7 days after disease onset,
the ovoid lesion had completely disappeared on MRI (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). a Diffusion-weighted imaging on
admission day 2, b Diffusion-weighted imaging on admission day 9. Abnormalities detected on MRI completely disappeared on admission day 9
(red circles) Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). a Diffusion-weighted imaging on admission day 2, b Diffusion-weighted imaging on
admission day 9. Abnormalities detected on MRI completely disappeared on admission day 9 (red circles) Conjunctival congestion and erythema
developed on hospital days 2 and 3, respectively. Aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and creatine phosphokinase levels
were high at 137, 88, and 11,240 U/l on hospital days 8, 4, and 8, respectively. Soon erythema developed, and desquamation occurred 2 weeks
after disease onset. In addition, isolated MSSA strains produced toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1). Although hypotension was not seen,
probable TSS was diagnosed from fever (temperature, >38.9 °C), erythema, desquamation, creatine phosphokinase elevation, liver dysfunction,
thrombocytopenia, and altered mental status [11, 12]. On hospital day 12, we switched from cefepime to vancomycin plus ceftriaxone because
of drug eruption. On hospital day 15, we switched from vancomycin plus ceftriaxone to cefazolin at 2 g every 8 h, because due to the
following reasons we concluded it was not necessary to consider cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) penetration by the antimicrobial agent: (i) CSF
examination results were unremarkable and culture negative, (ii) abnormal findings on head MRI were due to MERS, and (iii) multiple organ
injuries were due to TSS. Figure 3 shows the clinical course post admission. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed no abnormalities.
Moreover, septic emboli were not detected by enhanced computed tomography of the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis. We continued antibiotic
therapy for 4 weeks after the blood cultures tested negative, i.e., after hospital day 4. At the 6-month follow up, no recurrence was
noted.Fig. 3Patient's clinical course after hospitalization. Abbreviations: MSSA, methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus; magnetic
resonance imaging, MRI Patient's clinical course after hospitalization. Abbreviations: MSSA, methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus;
magnetic resonance imaging, MRI We describe a rare case of MERS caused by S. aureus bacteremia with probable TSS. MERS is caused by various
viruses, such as influenza, mumps, adenovirus, varicella, and zoster virus, but rarely by bacteria [7, 9]. Thus far, only one case of MERS
caused by S. aureus has been reported . To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of MERS with TSS. MRI is useful for
diagnosing MERS [1, 13] as MRI scans can reveal lesions in the SCC. In a case reported by Doherty et al., the lesion presented as reduced
diffusion on DWI, had a low ADC value, and disappeared within a month. The radiological findings of our case were typical of MERS . Acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is suggested to be considered as a differential diagnosis of postinfection encephalopathy . In our
case, the splenial lesion completely disappeared a week before clinical recovery, thus ruling out ADEM. Other differential diagnoses include
ischemia, posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome, diffuse axonal injury, multiple sclerosis, hydrocephalus, Marchiafava-Bignami
disease, lymphoma, and extrapontine myelinolysis . All were excluded clinically. Our patient had a catheter-related bloodstream infection
caused by MSSA. Probable TSS was diagnosed as the case met all the diagnostic criteria except hypotension and gastrointestinal symptoms
(Table 2). TSS is characterized by multiple organ impairment due to S. aureus exotoxin . Staphylococcal exotoxins can activate several T
cells at once, resulting in massive cytokine production . Activated T cells release interleukin (IL)-1, IL-2, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha, TNF-beta, and interferon-gamma in large amounts, resulting in TSS . Although the mechanism of MERS is unknown, Tada et al.
postulated two possible mechanisms for the transiently decreased ADC value of the lesions, intramyelinic edema, and inflammatory infiltrate
. We suppose that the inflammatory infiltrate caused by cytokine cascades of TSS are involved in the pathogenesis of MERS in our case.Table
2Diagnostic categories of toxic shock syndrome (TSS)Definite TSS (all criteria must be present) Clinical Criteria An illness with the
following clinical manifestations: • Fever: temperature greater than or equal to 102.0 °F (greater than or equal to 38.9 °C) • Rash: diffuse
macular erythroderma • Desquamation: 1–2weeks after onset of rash • Hypotension: systolic blood pressure less than or equal to 90 mmHg for
adults or less than the fifth percentile by age for children aged less than 16 years • Multisystem involvement (three or more of the
following organ systems): º Gastrointestinal: vomiting or diarrhea at onset of illness º Muscular: severe myalgia or creatine phosphokinase
level at least twice the upper limit of normal º Mucous membrane: vaginal, oropharyngeal, or conjunctival hyperemia º Renal: blood urea
nitrogen or creatinine at least twice the upper limit of normal for laboratory or urinary sediment with pyuria (greater than or equal to 5
leukocytes per high-power field) in the absence of urinary tract infection º Hepatic: total bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase enzyme, or
aspartate aminotransferase enzyme levels at least twice the upper limit of normal for laboratory º Hematologic: platelets less than
100,000/mm3 º Central nervous system: disorientation or alterations in consciousness without focal neurologic signs when fever and
hypotension are absentLaboratory Criteria for Diagnosis Negative results on the following tests, if obtained: • Blood or cerebrospinal fluid
cultures (blood culture may be positive for Staphylococcus aureus) • Negative serologies for Rocky Mountain spotted fever, leptospirosis, or
measlesProbable TSS (≥3 criteria and desquamation or ≥5 criteria without desquamation) • Temperature ≥38.9 °C • Rash • Hypotension,
orthostatic dizziness, or syncope • Myalgia • Vomiting, diarrhea, or both • Mucous membrane inflammation (conjunctivitis, pharyngitis,
vaginitis) • Clinical or laboratory abnormalities of ≥2 organ systems • Reasonable evidence for absence of other etiologies Diagnostic
categories of toxic shock syndrome (TSS) Although MERS coexisting with TSS is extremely rare, staphylococcal exotoxins may cause MERS. Since
our patient did not have hypotension, we could perform head MRI. Typically, TSS presents with hypotension and poor general conditions,
hindering MRI. Thus, one cannot ignore MERS coexisting with TSS. To conclude, we report the world's first case of MERS caused by S. aureus
bacteremia with TSS, and suggest that when a patient with TSS presents neurological symptoms, MERS should be considered. All the data
supporting our findings is contained within the manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Executive Editor of this journal. Not
applicable. apparent diffusion coefficient acute disseminated encephalomyelitis cerebrospinal fluid diffusion-weighted imaging interleukin
clinically mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion magnetic resonance imaging methicillin-sensitive S. aureus
splenium of the corpus callosum tumor necrosis factor toxic shock syndrome Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions KK: Management of the case and redaction and correction of the manuscript. TK: Redaction,
correction, and restructuring of the manuscript. YS, KM: Clinical management of the case and correction of the manuscript. MM: Manuscript
correction and redaction of the comment of the illustrations. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. None. No funding was
received.
