To the Editor: A 55-year-old homosexual man presented with complaints of right axillary redness for one week. He has been sexually active
with a male partner during his travel to South China in hot weather about a month ago. Physical examination revealed redness in his right
axillary area, which stained his white clothing [Figure 1a]. A lot of mobile Pthirus pubis insects were visible on his axillary hair in the
affected area [Figure 1b and 1c]. Dermatoscopy confirmed the presence of P. pubis on his right axillary hair [Figure 1d]. The patient was
found with no other sexually transmitted diseases except P. pubis with a detailed laboratory test and physical examination. Microbiological
studies revealed no bacterial or fungal etiology. Cotton stained with axillary sweat was seen. No systemic illnesses, genital lesions, or
pruritus outside the axilla area were observed. A diagnosis of P. pubis-related pseudochromhidrosis of the axillary hairs was made. No lice
or nits were detected in the beard, armpits, mustache, or eyelashes. No other sexually transmitted diseases were identified. The right
axillary area was shaved and treated with 10% sulfur ointment once daily for 3 days. The patient was advised to wash all clothing and
fomites with insecticide. The color vanished quickly. Two weeks later, the itching was resolved and the nits disappeared. No relapse or
recurrence was observed over a 12-month follow-up. (a) Red color on the white underwear. (b) Red color and moving pediculosis pubis over the
axillary. (c) A lot of moving pediculosis pubis and lice eggs on the axillary hairs in the red area. (d) Pediculosis pubis (with parasitic
ovum) under the camera and dermatoscope (Hamamatsu, Japan, original magnification, Ã—10). P. pubis, also known as crab louse or pubic louse,
is commonly transmitted sexually and may infest pubic hair and perianal areas, legs, forearms, chest, eyebrows, axillary hair and beard, and
rarely involves the eyelashes (phthiriasis palpebrarum). Interestingly, the patient showed only unilateral axillary disease. It may be
related to the side-sleeping posture or specific sex position. Dermatoscopy enabled identification of the louse. However, a detailed sexual
history and lifestyle evaluation are critical. For the management of P. pubis, 0.5% malathion lotion and 5% permethrin cream were
recommended based on the new European guidelines. Such patients often have concomitant sexually transmitted disease, warranting screening
for HIV, syphilis, gonorrhea, chlamydial infection, herpes, warts, and trichomoniasis. Pseudochromhidrosis is characterized by altered skin
pigmentation due to the presence of surface compounds, molecules, or chromogenic bacteria in the sweat. Pseudochromhidrosis occurs when
eccrine sweat reacts with dyed clothing, paints, or chromogenic bacteria. P. pubis infections alter the skin color by deep dermal
hemosiderin deposition from the bites and may stain the clothes with minute droplets of blood and crusts, prompting medical attention. In
conclusion, we report a case of P. pubis-induced unilateral axillary pseudochromhidrosis-like lesion. P. pubis is a rare clinical disease,
usually infected through sexual intercourse. In the differential diagnosis, clinicians should be alert to the possibility of other sexually
transmitted diseases. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. Edited by: Qiang Shi
