Eltrombopag, a thrombopoietin mimetic peptide, may provide excellent clinical efficacy in steroid-refractory patients with immune
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) . Eltrombopag is generally well tolerated. However, its use in the particular setting of glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD) and history of acute hemolytic anemia (AHA) has not been reported so far. A 51-year-old female was diagnosed as having
ITP in September 2014. She was not taking any medication and her past history was negative, apart from having been diagnosed a carrier
(heterozygous) of G6PD deficiency (Mediterranean variant) after a familial screening by molecular and biochemical methods. She presented
with only slightly reduced (about 50%) enzyme level, belonging to World Health Organization-defined class 3 . In the following years, the
patient experienced some episodes of AHA, which were managed at outside institutions; in particular, a severe episode of AHA, probably
triggered by urinary infection and antibiotics , had complicated her second and last delivery. The hemolytic episodes were self-limiting and
resolved without sequelae. No other causes of hemolysis were documented. When the case came to our attention, a diagnosis of ITP was made;
hemolytic parameters were normal, although the G6PD enzyme concentration was not measured. Oral prednisone (1 mg/kg) was given with only a
transient benefit. The patient was then a candidate for elective splenectomy. However, given her extremely low platelet count, she was
started in October 2014 on eltrombopag at 50 mg/day as a bridge to splenectomy. Given that, to the best of our knowledge, the use of this
drug has never been reported in the particular setting of G6PD deficiency, the patient was constantly monitored. A prompt platelet increase
(178x109/L) was observed 1 week after the start of treatment. After she achieved the target platelet count, the dose of eltrombopag was
tapered to the lowest effective dose. The patientâ€™s response was stabile while she remained on a dose of eltrombopag between 25 and 50
mg/day without any adverse events; in particular, no variations of hemolytic parameters were observed. As of today, after 6 months of
continuous eltrombopag administration, the patient has constantly maintained the target platelet counts and she is awaiting elective
splenectomy. According to our knowledge, we report for the first time the evidence regarding the safe use of this thrombomimetic agonist,
which provided an excellent treatment outcome without any adverse effects, in a steroid-refractory adult ITP patient at risk of drug-induced
AHA as a G6PD-deficient heterozygous carrier. G6PD deficiency is an X-linked, hereditary genetic defect for which heterozygous women, who
are usually asymptomatic, have a mosaicism of normal and G6PD-deficient erythrocytes. Given the possible decreased amount of G6PD enzyme,
although exceptional and only under particularly stressing conditions, such as urinary tract infections and/or the use of certain
antibiotics such as nitrofurantoin, AHA may occur . Although our report, being limited to a single patient, is purely anecdotal, considering
the high prevalence of G6PD deficiency and the increasing use of thrombomimetic drugs, further collection of such cases would be very useful
to determine the complication risks associated in this setting with the use of thrombopoietin agonists. Concept: Laura Scaramucci, Pasquale
Niscola, Massimiliano Palombi, Andrea Tendas, Marco Giovannini, Paolo de Fabritiis, Design: Laura Scaramucci, Pasquale Niscola, Massimiliano
Palombi, Andrea Tendas, Marco Giovannini, Paolo de Fabritiis, Data Collection or Processing: Laura Scaramucci, Marco Giovannini, Analysis or
Interpretation: Laura Scaramucci, Pasquale Niscola, Marco Giovannini, Literature Search: Pasquale Niscola, Massimiliano Palombi, Andrea
Tendas, Writing: Laura Scaramucci, Pasquale Niscola, Final Approval: Paolo de Fabritiis. Conflict of Interest: The authors of this paper
have no conflicts of interest, including specific financial interests, relationships, and/or affiliations relevant to the subject matter or
materials included
