Hemodialysis (HD) catheters are frequently inserted into the superior vena cava (SVC), and can lead to thrombotic complications. However, to
our knowledge, HD catheter-related thrombosis leading to subsequent SVC syndrome, bacteremia, and pulmonary emboli has not been described. A
28-year-old dialysis-dependent woman with IgA nephropathy developed facial swelling, head pressure, headache, nausea, dizziness and fever
6 weeks after right internal jugular (IJ) HD catheter placement. Chest and neck imaging demonstrated a non-occlusive thrombus surrounding
the HD catheter and extending from the SVC to the junction of the right IJ and right subclavian veins, confirming thrombosis-associated SVC
syndrome. Intravenous (IV) anticoagulation was initiated, as well as IV vancomycin for Staphylococcus epidermidis bacteremia. Despite prompt
intravenous anticoagulation, 9 and 12 days after initial presentation she developed catheter-associated pulmonary embolism (PE) and PE-
associated pulmonary infarction, respectively. Hypercoagulable workup was negative. The HD catheter was eventually replaced, HD resumed, and
the patient was transitioned from intravenous to oral anticoagulation and discharged. Nine months later, she underwent successful renal
transplantation. SVC syndrome and pulmonary embolism are potential consequences of HD catheter-related thrombosis. Given the frequency of HD
catheter placement, physicians should be aware of these potential complications in any patient with HD catheter-related thrombosis. In 2012,
61 % of patients with incident end-stage renal disease (ESRD) were initiated on hemodialysis (HD) via catheter alone (i.e., without a
fistula or arteriovenous graft) . When inserted into the lumen of the superior vena cava (SVC), these HD catheters have been shown to be
associated with catheter-related thrombosis, SVC syndrome, bacteremia and thromboembolism . However, to our knowledge, the co-occurrence of
these complications in the setting of HD catheter placement has not been reported. A 28-year-old Asian female hairstylist with hypertension
and ESRD secondary to IgA nephropathy presented to an outside hospital with one week of facial swelling, head pressure that worsened when
lying on the right side, headache when bending forward, nausea, dizziness and fever (Table 1). Six weeks prior to presentation, she
initiated hemodialysis via a tunneled right internal jugular (IJ) HD catheter. Her substance use, social, and family history were
unremarkable. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest and neck performed on the day of admission demonstrated the HD
catheter tip in the inferior right atrium, with thrombus formed around the HD catheter and extending along the catheter from the junction of
the right IJ and right subclavian vein, through the SVC and to the level of the cavoatrial junction. In the setting of SVC thrombus, she was
initiated on a continuous intravenous (IV) heparin infusion.Table 1Timeline of clinical eventsTimeEventDay 028yo woman with end-stage renal
disease in the setting of IgA nephropathy undergoes right IJ tunneled HD catheter placed for initiation of hemodialysisDay 47Presents to
outside hospital with SVC syndrome and started on intravenous heparinDay 51Transferred to our hospital with SVC syndrome and bacteremia (on
IV heparin and IV vancomycin) for consideration of advanced interventions involving the HD catheterDay 55Due to the persistence of thrombus-
associated SVC syndrome, HD catheter is removed and replaced; IV vancomycin and IV heparin are continued, and coumadin is initiatedDay
60Develops right-sided chest pain with fever; CT angiography demonstrates R-sided pulmonary embolismDay 63Develops pleuritic chest pain with
blood tinged sputum; CT chest demonstrates pulmonary infarctionDay 69Resolution of symptoms; discharged with six-month course of coumadin,
28-day course of vancomycin, and outpatient hemodialysisDay 268 (approximately 9 months after discharge)Underwent renal transplant Timeline
of clinical events Based on blood cultures obtained on admission to the outside hospital (4 days prior to transfer to our hospital), the
patient was found to have Staphylococcus epidermidis bacteremia, prompting initiation of IV vancomycin. Repeat blood cultures were negative.
Since the thrombus was situated proximal to the catheter lumen, hemodialysis was considered safe and continued without incident. Given the
need for possible advanced interventions for the tunneled HD catheter, 4 days after admission she was transferred to our tertiary care
hospital for further management. Upon transfer, her vital signs were: temperature 38.3 ℃, heart rate 96 beats per minute, blood pressure of
134/61 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation of 99 % on room air. Her physical exam was notable for diffuse
facial swelling and neck fullness. The heparin drip, vancomycin, analgesics and hemodialysis were continued. Warfarin was considered but
held in anticipation of possible HD catheter replacement. A hypercoagulable workup was negative. In the first 4 days at our hospital, the
symptoms of SVC syndrome persisted despite continuous IV heparin, with worsening headache and facial pressure along with persistent fever
despite negative blood cultures. Repeat contrasted CT of the chest demonstrated unchanged adherent, non-occlusive thrombus around the
catheter without extension beyond the SVC (Figs. 1, 2). Pharmacological thrombolysis was considered but not performed in the setting of
bacteremia, out of concern for bacterial shedding of a possibly infected clot (despite negative repeat blood cultures). Given the persistent
thrombus-associated SVC syndrome with worsening headache and possibility of an infected thrombus with persistent fever, the interventional
radiology team removed and replaced the right IJ HD catheter without incident, using ultrasound- and fluoroscopy-guided methods. Using
digital subtraction angiography (DSA) during fluoroscopy, an eccentric, adherent intraluminal thrombus measuring approximately 2 cm was
visualized on the right lateral aspect of the SVC. After replacement of the HD catheter, both the IV heparin drip and vancomycin along with
analgesia were resumed, and warfarin was initiated.Fig. 1CT chest with contrast (transverse view) demonstrating an HD catheter (bright white
shown by red arrow) with surrounding thrombus in the superior vena cava (blue arrow)Fig. 2CT chest with contrast (sagittal view)
demonstrating catheter in the SVC (bright white shown by red arrow) with surrounding thrombus CT chest with contrast (transverse view)
demonstrating an HD catheter (bright white shown by red arrow) with surrounding thrombus in the superior vena cava (blue arrow) CT chest
with contrast (sagittal view) demonstrating catheter in the SVC (bright white shown by red arrow) with surrounding thrombus Nine days into
admission and 5 days after new HD catheter replacement, the patient developed acute right-sided pleuritic chest pain with high-grade fevers.
Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the chest demonstrated an interval decrease in size of the SVC thrombus, along with new pulmonary
embolism involving the right main, middle, and lower lobe pulmonary arteries (Fig. 3). Because the patient was hemodynamically stable and
had no signs of right ventricular dysfunction on transthoracic echocardiogram, thrombolysis was not considered. Regarding her fever, repeat
blood cultures were negative, lending suspicion to fever secondary to clot burden. However, out of concern for infected thrombus in a
patient undergoing kidney transplant evaluation, vancomycin was continued based on a recommendation of the infectious disease team. The
patient was therefore continued on continuous IV heparin, warfarin, IV vancomycin, analgesics, and antipyretics.Fig. 3Computed tomography
angiography (CTA) of the chest (transverse view) demonstrating thrombus in the right pulmonary artery (red arrow) Computed tomography
angiography (CTA) of the chest (transverse view) demonstrating thrombus in the right pulmonary artery (red arrow) Three days after the
pulmonary embolism, the patient again developed pleuritic chest pain, but this time accompanied by blood-tinged sputum. A non-contrasted CT
scan of the chest showed multifocal peripheral wedge-shaped ground glass areas in the right lower and middle lobes, consistent with
pulmonary infarction (Fig. 4). In the setting of a subtherapeutic international normalized ratio (INR) for prothrombin time (PT), both
heparin and warfarin were continued. Once the INR reached therapeutic levels (goal range 2.0–3.0), the heparin infusion was
discontinued.Fig. 4CT chest without contrast (transverse view) demonstrating a right lower lobe wedge-shaped pulmonary infarction (red
arrow) CT chest without contrast (transverse view) demonstrating a right lower lobe wedge-shaped pulmonary infarction (red arrow) Eighteen
days after transfer to our hospital and 22 days after her initial hospital admission, the patient’s symptoms had remitted completely and she
was discharged with prescriptions for a 6-month course of coumadin, completion of a 28-day course of vancomycin (starting from the day of
her catheter removal), and oral pain medications. Outpatient hemodialysis continued uneventfully through the new-tunneled HD catheter. Her
INR was monitored closely with no adverse events noted. Nine months after discharge, she underwent successful renal transplantation. This
case involved a young female patient who experienced three particularly extreme complications of HD catheter-associated thrombosis: superior
vena cava (SVC) syndrome, bacteremia and pulmonary embolism (PE). HD catheters, which are often inserted into the internal jugular vein, are
predisposed to catheter-related thrombosis. As compared to other central venous catheters (CVCs), it is believed that HD catheters may be
associated with an increased risk of thrombosis-related complications, due to being used for hemodialysis, having longer and thicker lumens,
longer placement duration, and/or differences in blood flow, however this relationship is unknown. Similar to CVCs, risk factors for HD
catheter-related thrombosis include catheter-related characteristics including catheter caliber-to-vein ratio (i.e., 45 % or less associated
with decreased VTE risk ), venipuncture-associated trauma (which can be reduced with ultrasound guidance ), and catheter position (i.e.,
higher risk if catheter tip is in the brachiocephalic vein or proximal SVC versus distal to SVC ), and patient-related characteristics
including vein caliber, malignancy, prior thromboembolism, and a hypercoagulable state . The mechanism underlying HD catheter-associated
thrombosis is poorly understood, however factors such as recurrent vascular access, platelet dysfunction, endothelial factors, inflammation,
and clotting abnormalities have been suggested . While we could not be certain that our patient had a predisposing prothrombotic state, her
history of IgA nephropathy and isolated proteinuria may have been associated with the thromboembolic event, given case reports suggesting an
association of combined IgA nephropathy, malignancy, nephrotic syndrome, and heavy proteinuria with renal vein thrombosis, thrombotic
microangiopathy, left ventricular thrombus, and PE . However, patients with isolated IgA nephropathy, as compared to those with membranous
nephropathy (MN) or focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), have been shown to have a relatively low risk of thromboembolism [16, 20].
Hence, given that our patient had proteinuria without nephrotic syndrome in the setting of IgA nephropathy, we were less sure that IgA
nephropathy played a substantial role, if any, in her development of HD catheter-related thrombosis. Regarding the PE presented in this
case, prior studies of thrombosed venous catheters have found pulmonary emboli pathologically similar to the thrombosis in the SVC [21, 22].
Additionally, thrombus dislodgement has been reported immediately following catheter removal using transesophageal echocardiographic imaging
. In this specific case, we theorized the patient’s PE occurred secondary to slow migration of thrombus off the catheter or SVC vessel wall,
or to its dislodgement during HD catheter removal, and not due to non-catheter-related thrombus formation. Given that our patient had a PE
5 days after HD catheter removal, it seems more likely that slow thrombus migration explained her PE more so than catheter removal-related
thrombus dislodgement. Nevertheless, we cannot be certain of the precise mechanism. At this time, there are no published strategies
regarding prevention of venous thrombosis and thromboembolism in patients with HD catheters. Large randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
involving prophylactic anticoagulation for cancer patients with CVCs have been published, including a recent meta-analysis of nine RCTs
demonstrating unclear benefits and risks of thromboprophylaxis in this patient population. To our knowledge, trials in patients without
cancer, such as the patient presented in this case, have not been performed [15, 24]. Until more data surface in this area, practitioners
can continue to perform standard catheter care, including regular flushing with heparin or saline to maintain patency, and consideration of
silicon- or polyurethane-based catheters instead of those made from polyethylene. However, these strategies may not necessarily be
associated with lower thrombosis risk . As per guidelines by the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP), in the setting of catheter-
associated upper extremity DVTs, catheters no longer required can be removed. Available data do not suggest use of anticoagulation prior to
catheter removal, but do recommend anticoagulation for 3 months following removal. However, when catheters are functional and required, they
can remain in place, and anticoagulation should be continued for the duration of catheter placement . Since we were not aware of the
presence of an upper-extremity DVT in the above case, these guidelines do not specifically apply to our patient. Moreover, specific
recommendations regarding catheter-related SVC or right atrial thrombosis with or without PE have not been published. In case reports and
small studies involving patients similar to ours, anticoagulant therapy with low molecular weight heparin (in patients without ESRD) or
unfractionated heparin has been administered, followed by an oral vitamin K antagonist [3, 15, 27, 28]. Finally, while systemic and
catheter-directed thrombolysis along with stent placement have been used to successfully treat catheter-associated thrombosis and
thromboembolism, this evidence is limited to case reports and therefore requires further investigation [5, 6, 27]. In summary, our case of a
28-year old with IgA nephropathy who developed SVC thrombosis and subsequent SVC syndrome and pulmonary embolism highlights an under-
recognized complication of HD catheter placement. When a patient with an HD catheter develops signs and symptoms related to catheter-
associated thrombosis, health care providers must be mindful of other potential subsequent complications, and consider prompt workup and
treatment. Superior vena cava syndrome and pulmonary embolism are potential consequences of hemodialysis catheter-related thrombosis.
Practitioners should monitor for these potentially life-threatening complications in any patient with an HD catheter who develops catheter-
related thrombosis. Given the increasing use of HD catheters, further investigation is needed to clarify the prevalence, pathophysiology,
risk factors, prophylaxis and treatment for this potentially life-threatening complication. hemodialysis superior vena cava internal jugular
intravenous pulmonary embolism central venous catheter end-stage renal disease computed tomography computed tomography angiography
international normalized ratio prothrombin time deep venous thrombus digital subtraction angiography membranous nephropathy focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis randomized controlled trial American College of Chest Physicians ST case report conception and design, data acquisition,
manuscript preparation, and approval of the final version of the manuscript for publication. PT data acquisition, critical appraisal of the
manuscript for important intellectual content, and approval of the final version of the manuscript for publication. BK case report
conception and design, manuscript preparation, critical appraisal of the manuscript for important intellectual content, and approval of the
final version of the manuscript for publication. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank Christine
Caufield-Noll, MLIS, AHIP for assisting with the literature search for this manuscript. All data are available in the manuscript. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case
Report and any accompanying images. No funding was available for this study.
