Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 69 Final Diagnosis: Recurrent ventricular tachycardia Symptoms: Multiple ICD
shocks Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Ventricular tachycardia ablation Specialty: Cardiology Rare co-existance of disease or pathology
Regional cardiac sympathetic denervation causes electrophysiological heterogeneity and has been found to be a predictor of potentially
lethal VT. We present the case of 69-year-old patient admitted with recurrent ventricular tachycardia and a history of anterior myocardial
infarction. In line with Tc-99m-MIBI-SPECT perfusion imaging, electroanatomical mapping revealed extensive LV anterior scarring as detected
by low-voltage areas. Surprisingly, I-123-MIBG-SPECT showed an extensive deficit of sympathetic innervation inferior (mismatch) and
anterolateral (match). Combination of electroanatomical mapping with tomographic imaging of innervation and perfusion might improve our
understanding of the neural trigger of VT after myocardial infarction or substrate-based catheter ablation. Regional cardiac sympathetic
denervation causes electrophysiological heterogeneity and has been found to be a predictor of potentially lethal VT. A 69-year-old male
patient with a history of anterior myocardial infarction in 1988 presented with recurrent ventricular tachycardia (VT) that had to be
terminated by multiple shocks of his implantable cardioverter defibrillator. A left ventricular (LV) apex aneurysm and a low LV ejection
fraction were confirmed in echocardiography. Resting Tc-99m-MIBI-SPECT reflected the anterior myocardial scar with corresponding perfusion
deficit (Figure 1A) which are presented 3-dimensionally (3D) (left column: anterior view; middle column: posterior view) and as polar plot
(right column). No high-grade coronary stenosis was found in coronary angiography. I-123-MIBG-SPECT 4 hours after intravenous injection
(Figure 1B) showed an extensive deficit of sympathetic innervation inferior (mismatch,#) and anterolateral (match). However, residual
innervation could be documented in a basal anterolateral region with severely impaired perfusion (reverse mismatch,*). Electroanatomical
mapping (by using image integration with fluoroscopy), in line with perfusion, supported extensive LV anterior scarring as detected by low-
voltage areas (Figure 1C). Note also the electroanatomical polar plot (custom-made software) supporting scarring in the left anterior
descending coronary artery perfusion area. Substrate-based ablation was performed within the anterior myocardial scarring (low-voltage
areas) . Despite abolition of all signals indicating local abnormal ventricular activation, the patient again experienced a VT of midseptal
origin (207 bpm, cycle length 290 ms) remote from the myocardial scar, which had to be additionally treated by radiofrequency catheter
ablation. Denervation of inferior areas is known to occur in patients after modulating parts of the autonomic/sympathetic intracardiac
nervous system located at the posterior wall of the left atrium during pulmonary vein isolation . The present sympathetic innervation of the
anterior non-perfused scar area might mirror a partial re-innervation 27 years after myocardial infarction. Regional cardiac sympathetic
denervation causes electrophysiological heterogeneity in the myocardium and has been found to be a predictor of potentially lethal VT .
Inhomogeneity in LV sympathetic innervation has also been described in areas remote from post-myocardial infarction scarring but is yet not
fully understood . Combination of electroanatomical mapping with tomographic imaging of innervation and perfusion might improve our
understanding of the neural trigger of VT after myocardial infarction or substrate-based catheter ablation. Conflicts of interest None
Mismatch between cardiac imaging modalities. (A) Tc-99m-MIBI-SPECT perfusion imaging reveals areas of reduced anterior and inferior
perfusion. (B) I-123-MIBG-SPECT imaging demonstrates reduced sympathetic innervation at the inferior left ventricle. (C) Electroanatomical
mapping depicts extensive LV anterior scarring as detected by low-voltage areas.
