Patients with borderline personality disorder (BPD) show significant impairment in functioning, particularly in the interpersonal and social
domains. Prior reports suggest that clozapine may be effective in the management of BPD. We present the case of a patient with BPD who
experienced persistent suicidal ideation and was treated with clozapine at a state psychiatric hospital. After treatment failure with other
psychotropic medications, clozapine medication was initiated; not only did suicidal ideation cease, but social and professional functioning
also greatly improved to the point of no longer requiring intensive levels of observation or restrictive procedures. Clozapine appears to be
efficacious in the management of suicide attempts and self-injurious behavior. Moreover, it appears to be promising as a therapeutic measure
for ameliorating the global functioning of patients with severe BPD. Larger, randomized, blinded, and controlled prospective studies are
needed to confirm these findings and to determine optimal dosage. Patients with borderline personality disorder (BPD) show significant
impairment in the domain of interpersonal and social functioning and may be heavy users of health and social services resources, albeit with
little beneficial outcome. BPD affects approximately 1% to 2% of the general population and up to 20% of psychiatric patients.1) BPD is a
serious mental disorder that is difficult to treat; although BPD has been the focus of more medication trials than any other Axis II
disorder, there are presently no clear guidelines in the literature regarding the use of pharmacotherapy in its management. Clozapine is
among the medications that have been evaluated for the treatment of severe BPD. Based on the scanty literature available in the form of case
reports and small studies, there is some evidence that it is effective in the management of BPD.2–4) The present study aims to describe the
effectiveness of clozapine in a patient with severe BPD without psychotic features who had severe recurrent suicidal thoughts, repeated and
prolonged periods of hospitalization, and was unsuccessfully treated with other psychotropic medications. We used the Social Functioning
Scale (Markers version) to assess the patient’s social functioning5); this scale is a generic questionnaire that measures social and
professional functioning along six major dimensions (social withdrawal, relationships, recreational activities, independence , independence
, and employment). A male patient, 33 years of age and the youngest among five siblings, was born after a normal and accepted, though
unplanned, pregnancy. His psychomotor development was normal, but during adolescence and early adulthood he exhibited instability in
intimate relationships and in the professional sphere. He had a brother 17 years his senior who, despite no known psychiatric history, died
by hanging himself when the patient was five years old. The patient assisted at the scene, and later recounted that the memory of the event
stayed with him as a recurring image. He also has two sisters, both of whom are being regularly followed in our ward for recurrent
depressive disorder, but who have never been hospitalized. One of the sisters relapsed mildly in March 2015 after cessation of anti-
depressive medication. The patient’s mother is regarded by our team of doctors as chronically depressed. The patient has been followed for
two years for major depressive disorder and BPD. He has attempted suicide three times. The first attempt involved electrocution in February
2013, and represented an impulsive and non-premeditated act without specific triggering factors, whereas the second and third attempts
involved ingesting chloralose, a chemical used to exterminate rats. He has been hospitalized twice as a consequence of these suicide
attempts (one suicide attempt occurred while he was already admitted to the hospital; he was stopped by a team of nurses who noticed the
chemical in his possession upon his return from an authorized visit to his father, who had recently suffered a stroke that rendered him
quadriplegic). His last hospital admission was in August 2014, at which time he was clearly distressed and challenging in his behavior,
exhibiting a lack of cooperation and an inability to express anything but a desire to be free either of his suicidal thoughts or of his
life. He displayed no remorse following his intake of chloralose and expressed pessimism concerning the possibility of being helped,
asserting that he still considered suicide to be the perfect solution in the absence of a medication that could eliminate his persistent
thoughts of self-harm. He displayed the same set of symptoms during each hospitalization period; impulsivity, irritability, sadness, and
intrusive ideas of self-harm. In addition, he exhibited very poor social and professional functioning, with his scores on the Social
Functioning Scale (Markers version) consistently falling below 30%. He has received a variety of anti-depressive treatments including
clomipramine, escitalopram, sertraline, paroxetine, venlafaxine and mood stabilizers (lithium, lamotrigine, olanzapine, risperidone and
amisulpride). The dosage used was adequate and the period of treatment for each of these drugs was never shorter than eight weeks.
Ultimately, only paroxetine offered some tangible, although partial, benefit: his score on the Hamilton Depression Scale dropped by six
points from 25 to 19 points, but it remains unclear if the observed effect was partly due to the psychotherapy he had been undergoing for a
period of three months prior to receiving paroxetine. Given these unsatisfactory treatment results, the patient’s poor global functioning
and the pressing risk of suicide, treatment with clozapine was initiated once the consent of the patient and the ethical committee of the
hospital were obtained. The patient responded to a dose of 300 mg per day (he continued to experience intrusive suicidal ideation at doses
of 250 and 275 mg), with a bloodstream level of 392.8 ng/ml, along with paroxetine (40 mg/day; a relapse occurred each time the patient
ceased taking paroxetine, even when treated with clozapine). This course of treatment resulted in rapid and significant changes for the
patient both clinically and socially; he returned home and resumed searching for a job, expressing a desire to start a family. Table 1
presents the patient’s psychometric outcomes according to daily clozapine dose. The patient has shown no signs of relapse in the more than
six months since his discharge from the hospital. This case presents important findings consistent with the available literature regarding
the effects of clozapine in nonpsychotic, self-injurious patients with BPD, showing improvement along multiple dimensions including symptom
severity, impulsivity, self-mutilation, number of days of intensive observation and overall functioning. Recent Cochrane Reviews and
guidelines from the National Centre for Clinical Excellence (NICE) suggest that the various non-clozapine medications commonly prescribed
for individuals with BPD have little if any therapeutic effect6); thus far, there are no clear guidelines for the use of psychotropic drugs
in treating BPD. The American Psychiatric Association practice guidelines for BPD identify clozapine as a treatment that may be used when
other treatments fail,7) although only a few open studies have assessed the efficacy of clozapine in BPD patients. In 1993, a study
involving 15 BPD patients indicated that clozapine improved psychotic symptoms and overall global functioning (according to the Brief
Psychiatric Rating Scale and scores of Global Assessment Functioning ). A subsequent study conducted in 1998 confirmed these results with 12
BPD patients treated with low-dose clozapine (25–100 mg per day). After three weeks, BPRS and GAF scores improved, as did impulsivity and
mood (as measured by the Hamilton Rating Scale).3) Other studies have demonstrated that clozapine can decrease aggressive behaviors
(including self-mutilating behaviors), ameliorate relationships and decrease the frequency of hospitalization.8–11) Dosage varies widely
among studies, ranging between 25 mg and 550 mg per day. These data together with our present case study support the conclusion that
clozapine may be effective in BPD, particularly in cases of persistent and invasive thoughts of self-harm and suicide and for patients who
exhibit severe impairment in global functioning. The appropriate dosage must be gauged relative to symptoms, but a 2013 study by Frogley et
al.10) suggests that a bloodstream level of between 360 and 430 ng/ml is needed, which was indeed the case for our patient. Despite the lack
of clear evidence, pharmacological treatment is widely used for patients with BPD. This case report corroborates previous studies supporting
the use of clozapine in BPD patients who do not respond to classical pharmacological treatments, particularly those with severe suicidal
thoughts or significant impairment in global functioning. Clozapine may have beneficial effects along numerous dimensions including self-
harm, suicidality, interpersonal relationships, number of days spent hospitalized, and the intensity of interventions required while in
hospital. Further controlled studies are needed to establish the effective therapeutic dosage and its correlation with bloodstream level.
Psychometric scales with the increase of clozpine dose HDS, Hamilton Depression Scale; BPRS, Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale; Sofa, Social
Functioning Scale (Markers version).
