The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Current address: Medical Services and Diagnostic, Swiss Tropical and Public
Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland On 2nd July 2013, a 29-year-old HIV-positive woman presented herself to the outpatient clinic at the
Infectious Diseases Institute in Kampala, Uganda. Her weight had decreased from 46 kg to 42 kg in the past few weeks. In addition, she
complained about abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, and evening fevers during the week leading up to her visit (see Table 1 and Fig 1 for
patient characteristics). Her CD4 T cell count in June 2013 was 34 cells/μl, and she had documented second-line antiretroviral treatment
(tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, emtricitabine, and lopinavir-ritonavir) failure. She admitted to taking her medications irregularly and was
on trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis. Her last HIV-1 RNA viral load in June 2013 was 199,994 copies/ml. Based on her
immunosuppression and symptoms, we screened her for tuberculosis (TB). At the time of screening, she could not produce sputum, but an
abdominal ultrasound in late June 2013 showed a lymphadenopathy. A chest X-ray was not carried out at baseline, as it would not have changed
the clinical decision to treat the presumptive diagnosis of extrapulmonary TB. Her glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 55 mL/min, the liver
enzyme alanine aminotransferase was 33 IU/L (normal range 0–35 IU/L), and her albumin level was slightly decreased (35.5 g/L; normal range
38–47 g/L). Please note that the scheme is not to scale. kg, kilogram; ART, antiretroviral treatment; TMP-SMX, trimethoprim-
sulphamethoxazole; CD4, CD-4 T cell count; c/μL, cells per microliter; VL, HIV-1 RNA plasma viral load; c/ml, copies per milliliter; TB,
tuberculosis; US, ultrasound; n.d., not done; Rif/HZE, rifabutin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, ethambutol; CXR, chest X-ray; ALT, alanine
aminotransferase; IU/L, International Unit per liter; g/L, gram per liter; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; ml/min, milliliter per minute;
CrAG, cryptococcal antigen; EH, ethambutol, isoniazid; Ampho, amphotericin B deoxcholeate. She was started on antituberculosis treatment
consisting of rifabutin, isoniazid, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide on 1st August 2013. During follow-up, the patient claimed to adhere to her
treatments and reported that the abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, and evening fever stopped; nevertheless, she continued to lose weight
in the weeks that followed. At the follow-up visit on 26th September 2013, the patient reported the development of hyperpigmented,
progressive nodular, dome-shaped, non-itchy, and well-demarked facial skin lesions that had increased in number and size during the previous
four weeks (see Fig 2A). She did not have prior lesions and complained again about abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, and evening fevers.
Despite adherence to treatment, she had lost about 15% of her body weight since treatment began. Apart from generalized weakness and a
hepatomegaly (approximately 5 centimeters under the right costal margin), no abnormalities were found during physical examination,
especially neither palpable lymph nodes nor oral or eye symptoms. A) Patient presented with skin lesions on 26th September 2013. A biopsy
was taken from the large lesion and led to a diagnosis of Histoplasma capsulatum (see arrow). B) Clinical response after a 14-day course of
amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.7 mg/kg body weight), followed by six days of fluconazole (400 mg twice daily) maintenance therapy. C) Four
months into maintenance treatment, the lesions had resolved. Despite the possible explanation of (multi-) drug resistant TB, the continued
weight loss and the appearance of new lesions warranted a revision of the initial diagnosis and additional investigations. In this woman,
the differential diagnoses included but were not limited to TB of the skin, Kaposi sarcoma, atypical mycobacteria infection, disseminated
fungal diseases, and neoplastic mimics of Kaposi sarcoma–like cutaneous T cell lymphoma. The situation was complicated by the fact that the
patient had a high HIV-1 viral load at the beginning of TB treatment, and restarting her antiviral treatment together with her TB treatment
could have led to clinical deterioration because of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome occurrence. In our resource-limited setting,
we opted for a stepwise approach. A chest X-ray was unremarkable (not shown); the serum antigen test for Cryptococcus neoformans was
negative. A skin biopsy showed Histoplasmosis capsulatum infection. We did not have access to H. capsulatum detection tests. For a review of
molecular epidemiology, clinical findings, diagnosis, and treatment of histoplasmosis in HIV-infected patients, please refer to the review
of Adenis . The woman was hospitalized for treatment of disseminated histoplasmosis. Treatment for severe disseminated histoplasmosis
ideally consists of liposomal amphotericin B 3 mg/kg/d for seven to 14 days or until clinical improvement, followed by itraconazole 200 mg
three times daily for three days, then 200 mg twice daily for at least 12 months where available . In our setting, only amphotericin B
deoxycholate and fluconazole were available. We treated the patient with 0.7 mg/kg amphotericin B deoxycholate for 14 days, then switched to
fluconazole 400 mg twice daily for two weeks and afterwards to 400 mg once daily for a maintenance phase. Because of the initial clinical
response to TB treatment, the TB treatment was continued. Based on the Ugandan national guidelines, and to avoid rifampicin-
lopinavir/ritonavir interaction, we choose ethambutol/isoniazid for maintenance treatment, although this regime has been shown to be
inferior to rifampicin/isoniazid . The lesions responded very well to amphotericin B deoxycholate treatment, and the patient’s weight began
to increase (see Table 1 and Fig 1). A follow-up abdominal ultrasound on 28th October 2013 showed that the lymphadenopathy had been
resolved. During the amphotericin B deoxycholate therapy, we regularly monitored serum electrolytes and the GFR. The GFR remained stable
over time. Four months into antifungal treatment, the patient reached her baseline body weight of 46 kg and the lesions had healed (see Fig
2B and 2C). The patient was seen regularly, and the fluconazole was stopped on 4th December 2014. She did not develop any new skin lesions
and was last seen on 16th June 2015. On that day, her CD4 T cell count was 19 cells/microliter, and her HIV-1 RNA viral load was 252,000
copies/milliliter. Her body weight was stable at 49 kg, and the patient did not have any clinical complaints. The patient is still on
failing second-line antiretroviral treatment and has been enrolled in the control arm of the AIDS Clinical Trial Group Study A5288
(Management Using the Latest Technologies in Resource-Limited Settings to Optimize Combination Therapy After Viral Failure). This case
illustrates the challenges of diagnosing (disseminated) histoplasmosis in our particular setting. Without skin involvement, the diagnosis
would have been difficult to ascertain, as H. capsulatum serum antigen tests were not available. The overlap of histoplasmosis and TB
clinical findings is shown in Table 2. Data on drug-resistant, extrapulmonary TB in Uganda is only anecdotal, but the first national survey
published in 2013 showed that the 1.4% of previously untreated sputum smear–positive TB patients were multidrug-resistant . Because the
patient was critically ill and response to TB treatment can take several weeks or even months, we decided to continue TB treatment. In view
of the response to the antifungal treatment, continuation of TB treatment should be seen as critical in retrospect. Because of financial
constraints, state-of-the-art maintenance treatment with itraconazole could not be provided. In addition, use of itraconazole warrants
pharmacological monitoring, which was not available in our setting. Nevertheless, the patient responded well to fluconazole. Diagnosis of TB
can be challenging in resource-limited settings. No “antibiotic trial” for TB diagnosis should be given. The clinical symptoms of
histoplasmosis and TB overlap, which results in underdiagnosis of histoplasmosis in Africa, but H. capsulatum polysaccharide can be detected
with high sensitivity and specificity in serum and bronchioloalveolar lavages. Fluconazole has been shown to be less effective in the
maintenance phase than itraconazole in clinical trials but has been used on an ad-hoc basis. A maintenance phase should be carried out for
at least 12 months, and lifelong suppressive therapy may be required if immunosuppression cannot be reversed. Although consolidation phase
treatment with rifampicin/isoniazid has been proven to be superior to ethambutol/isoniazid, this treatment circumvented the hepatotoxic
interaction between the protease inhibitor and rifampicin, and eight months of ethambutol/isoniazid continues to be the standard in Uganda.
We would like to thank the patient for providing informed consent and support for sharing her case. We are very grateful to the clinical
team at the Infectious Diseases Institute for providing clinical care and follow-up.
