A young female with recurrent tophaceous gout and infertility presented to our clinic. On clinical evaluation, hypoglycaemia,
hypertriglyceridaemia, lactic acidosis, and hepatomegaly were noted. Targeted gene sequencing revealed a novel composite heterozygous
c.190G>T/c.508C>T mutation in the G6PC gene of the patient, leading to a diagnosis of glycogen storage disease type Ia. Her father possessed
a heterozygous c.190G>T mutation, and her mother possessed a heterozygous c.508C>T mutation. A search of the previous literature revealed 16
reported cases of glycogen storage disease type Ia with gout. Here, we describe a female patient with gout, review previous cases, and
discuss the mechanisms of gout and hyperuricaemia in glycogen storage disease type Ia. Gout is a common chronic crystal arthritis
predominantly found in elderly males. Gout in females, however, is less common, especially in premenopausal women; according to the UK
database, the incidence of female gout with an onset age younger than 20 years is 1/10,000 . In young female gout patients, genetic causes
should be carefully evaluated. Glycogen storage diseases are a group of inherited disorders characterized by impaired glycogen utilization
in the liver or muscle. Gout and hyperuricaemia are common presentations . Here, we report the atypical case of a female premenopausal
patient with a diagnosis of gout who possessed a novel composite heterozygous mutation of the G6PC gene, leading to a diagnosis of glycogen
storage disease type Ia (GSD-Ia). We then reviewed the previous reports of GSD-Ia with documentation of gout. A 27-year-old female presented
to the Gout Clinic of Peking Union Medical College Hospital with recurrent arthritis and infertility. Fourteen years before presentation,
she noticed protrusion of her right ankle but did not undergo evaluation at a hospital. Eight years before presentation, at age 19, she
experienced acute pain and swelling of her right ankle. The pain resolved spontaneously but recurred 6 to 7 times/year, involving the
bilateral metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints, bilateral ankles, and right knee. Her serum urate level (SUA) was elevated to 789 μmol/L. A
diagnosis of gout was made, and she was prescribed NSAIDs for pain relief and allopurinol and benzbromarone to lower her urate level.
However, she discontinued allopurinol and benzbromarone on her own as these medications triggered acute flares. Five years before
presentation, she noticed multiple nodules in her MTP joints, ankles, and fingers. The nodules on her feet interfered with normal walking.
She also complained of the inability to conceive after 3 years of attempts. Her age at menarche was 14 years, and her cycles were irregular.
She was reported to prefer snacks and fatty food during her childhood. Her father had hypertension. Her grandfather had an SUA level greater
than 400 μmol/L but without gout. On physical examination, the patient was generally healthy, with a height of 168 cm and a weight of 55 kg.
Her blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg. Cardiac and pulmonary examinations were normal. On abdominal palpation, the liver was enlarged with a
normal soft texture. A joint examination revealed multiple nodules on the bilateral MTP1 joints, ankles, and fingers. A serological
examination after overnight fasting revealed a SUA level of 548 μmol/L, serum creatinine (Cr) level of 49 μmol/L, fasting glucose level of
3.6 mmol/L, total triglyceride level of 6.22 mmol/L, and total cholesterol level of 6.60 mmol/L. Her resting lactate level was 7.4 mmol/L.
Her 24-h urine urate level was 2.262 mmol/24 h, and her fractional excretion of uric acid (FE-UA) was 2.48 %. Her liver enzymes were normal.
The estrogen level and basal body temperature curve were normal for her age and menstrual status. Renal ultrasonography revealed normal
kidney size with possible calcium deposits in the bilateral renal medulla. Computed tomography (CT) imaging of her abdomen showed
hepatomegaly without nodules. The pelvic ultrasonography and salpingography findings were normal. Serum examinations of her parents and her
husband were normal. Whole blood DNA was extracted from all four family members (the patient, both parents, and her husband) after signing
an informed consent form. A genetic study was first conducted with a target gene sequencing approach. A search of the OMIM, NIH, and PubMed
databases using the key words “FEMALE,” “GOUT,” and “HYPERLACTACIDEMIA” indicated familial juvenile hyperuricaemic nephropathy, glycogen
storage disease type I, and glycogen storage disease type II. Next-generation sequencing was used to sequence each of the exons of the UMOD,
RENIN, G6PC, SLC37A4, and GAA genes, as well as two SNP loci (rs2231142 and rs72552713) of ABCG2 found in our previous report of a family
including a female with gout. The genetic sequencing results showed that UMOD, RENIN, SLC37A4, GAA and rs72552713 of ABCG2 were all normal
in the patient and her family. Sequencing of the G6PC gene revealed composite heterozygous c.190G>T/c.508C>T mutations in the patient, a
heterozygous c.190G>T mutation in her father, and a heterozygous c.508C>T mutation in her mother. The genetic analysis of her husband was
normal. The c.190G>T mutation was located on exon 1 and encoded a missense mutation of p.V64L, whereas the c.508C>T mutation was located on
exon 4 and encoded a nonsense mutation of p.R170X (Fig. 1). Sequencing of 50 healthy females and 100 healthy males at the two loci produced
normal results. To our knowledge, the c.190G>T mutation has not been reported in previous literature.Fig. 1Protein structures of G6C and the
mutations found in this study. The G6PC protein contains nine trans-membrane domains and ten topological domains. There are two binding
sites on residue 83 and 170 (yellow arrowhead) and two active sites on residues 119 and 176 (red arrowhead). The two mutations, shown by the
black arrows, were c.190G>T, resulting in p.V64L and c.508C>T, encoding p.R170X. The gray arrowheads indicate previous mutations reported in
GSD1a patients complicated with gout Protein structures of G6C and the mutations found in this study. The G6PC protein contains nine trans-
membrane domains and ten topological domains. There are two binding sites on residue 83 and 170 (yellow arrowhead) and two active sites on
residues 119 and 176 (red arrowhead). The two mutations, shown by the black arrows, were c.190G>T, resulting in p.V64L and c.508C>T,
encoding p.R170X. The gray arrowheads indicate previous mutations reported in GSD1a patients complicated with gout We then searched PubMed
using the keywords “GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE TYPE IA” and “GOUT” and restricted the language to English. Patients with biopsy and/or gene
sequencing confirmed GSD-Ia, as well as those with documented gouty arthritis, were reviewed, whereas those with other types of glycogen
storage diseases and hyperuricaemia without gout flares were excluded. A total of 16 cases were available for review (Table 1). Among these
cases, the male-to-female ratio was 9:7. Gout developed after puberty and was usually severe. Patient 1 had catastrophic axial gout
resulting in irreversible paralysis. In contrast, the clinical presentations of glycogen storage were relatively mild, and ten (62.5 %)
patients were not diagnosed until the gout was evaluated. All patients had hepatomegaly, and most exhibited hypoglycaemia,
hypertriglyceridaemia, and lactate acidosis. Nine patients had recorded short stature, and four patients had recorded delayed puberty.
Patient 4 experienced recorded irregular menses and a spontaneous abortion. Most of the patients were diagnosed by liver biopsy at a
relatively late age (average age, 20.5 ± 3.06 years). G-6Pase enzyme activity was analyzed in five patients (patients 3, 4, 6, 8, and 11),
which revealed partial or complete loss of enzyme activity. An additional four patients (patients 6, 7, 9, and 10) had undergone gene
sequencing, two of which (patients 6 and 7) possessed a composite heterozygous p.R83C/p.M5R mutation, whereas the other two patients
(patients 9 and 10) possessed a homozygous p.M121V mutation (Table 1).Table 1Summary of previous reports on gout in glycogen storage disease
(GSD) type IaAge of GSD (years)Age of gout (yrs)SUA (μmol/L)Serum lactate (mmol/L)Total triglyceride (mmol/L)Fasting glucose (mmol/L)Growth
retardationReproduction systemOther presentationGSD diagnosisRef–a F27197897.46.223.6NoIrregular menses, infertilitySequencingb 1M430648–f
2.37–f –f –f Anemia, paralysis due to axial goutLiver biopsy2F2320567–f 13.083.1–f –f Elevated liver enzyme, myopathyLiver
biopsy3M18214922.08–f YesDelayed pubertyRenal failure; multiple hepatic cystsEnzyme activity test4F6294742.5–f 3.6YesIrregular menses,
spontaneous abortionRenal failure; multiple cystsEnzyme activity test5M281683010.22.142.9–f –f Anemia; hepatic adenomaLiver
biopsy6M171768073.263.9–f –f EpilepsyLiver biopsy, enzyme activity testing and sequencingc 7F14146254.423.30–f –f –f Sequencingc 8M0.75e
21711High–f LowYes–f Multiple liver adenomasLiver biopsy, enzyme activity test9M32216904.213.523.6NoNormalMultiple liver adenomasSequencingd
10F34185342.4910.453.7NoNormalSequencingd 11F40147923.5421.894.3YesNormalLiver biopsy, enzyme activity
testing12F30234865.127.403.3YesNormalDecreased uric acid excretionLiver biopsy13M28249006.3512.93.2YesNormalDecreased uric acid
excretionLiver biopsy14M18157804.6916.932.8YesDecreased pubertyLiver biopsy of a sibling15F322459012Elevated2.5YesDelayed
menarcheIntravenous galactose experiment16M418339–f 17.52.8Yes–f Liver biopsy aThe case presented in this report bp.V64L/p.R170X composite
heterozygotes cp.R83C/p.M5R composite heterozygotes dp.M121V homozygous eDiagnosis of GSD at the age of 9 months–fNo records Summary of
previous reports on gout in glycogen storage disease (GSD) type Ia aThe case presented in this report bp.V64L/p.R170X composite
heterozygotes cp.R83C/p.M5R composite heterozygotes dp.M121V homozygous eDiagnosis of GSD at the age of 9 months –fNo records This case of a
female gout patient was unusual in several ways. The age of gout onset was early, and the disease course was severe, with formation of
multiple large stones only 3 years after the first gout flare. She also exhibited hypoglycaemia, hypertriglyceridaemia, lactic acidosis, and
hepatomegaly, indicating a metabolic abnormality. Irregular menses and infertility also raised suspicion. A genetic study revealed a novel
composite heterozygous mutation of the G6PC gene. Given the typical clinical presentation and the presence of a composite heterozygous
missense mutation, a diagnosis of GSD-Ia was made. Gout and hyperuricaemia are common phenotypes observed in several inherited diseases .
GSD-Ia (OMIM: 232220), also known as Von Gierke disease, is a well-known autosomal recessive disease characterized by the inability to
convert stored hepatic glycogen into circulating glucose . Patients are usually diagnosed as babies, with a characteristic doll face,
protruding abdomen and hepatomegaly, hypoglycaemic attacks, hypertriglyceridaemia, lactic acidosis, and growth and mental retardation.
Patients usually fail to thrive if they are not properly treated . Hyperuricaemia is also a feature, whereas gout is found only in those who
reach puberty. Alepa et al. reported decreased renal uric acid secretion in GSD-Ia patients (341∼381 mg/24 h; normal range
426 ± 81 mg/24 h). However, the finding that the uricosuric agent probenecid is ineffective to lower uric acid, whereas the xanthine oxidase
inhibitor allopurinol can effectively maintain a normal SUA level, indicates that over-production might be the main mechanism of
hyperuricaemia in GSD-Ia patients . Jakovcic and Sorensen used radioactive glycine-C14 to study the process of glycogen conversion in GSD-Ia
patients. They found that the uric acid pool and daily production in GSD-Ia patients were 63 and 25 mg/kg, respectively, which are
significantly higher than the normal values of 20 and 10 mg/kg, respectively; in contrast, the recovery of uric acid-C14 from the urine was
31.5 % of the injected dose, which was lower than the normal value of >65 %. Thus, in GSD-Ia patients, both over-production and under-
secretion contributes to hyperuricaemia. The culprit gene of GSD-Ia is G6PC, which encodes glucose-6-phophatase (G6Pase). Normally, G6Pase
converts glucose-6-phosphate into glucose and inorganic phosphate (Pi), which is an important step to maintain normal blood glucose levels
during glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. However, in the absence of G6Pase, glucose-6-phosphate accumulates in the cells and is then
redirected into the pentose phosphate pathway, producing ribose-5-phosphate . In the liver, ribose-5-phosphate degrades into phosphoribosyl
pyrophosphate (PRPP), which is the first step in the uric acid de novo synthesis pathway . In addition, the inability of glucose-6-phosphate
to release Pi impairs the ATP compensation processes, resulting in an accumulation of the ATP degradation products ADP and AMP. ADP and AMP
are then deaminated into IMP and enter the uric acid salvage synthesis pathway . Thus, in GSD-Ia, both the de novo and salvage synthesis
pathways of uric acid are accelerated. In addition, serum lactate has been shown to trans-stimulate the urate reabsorption transporters,
urate transporter 1 (URAT1), and glucose transporter 9 (GLUT9) [18, 19], in the renal proximal tubules, resulting in increased uric acid
reabsorption and decreased uric acid secretion. The patient in this case and in four other cases reported irregular menses. In one study of
13 patients with GSD-Ia (mean age 11.2 years), all patients older than 4.8 years of age had a polycystic ovarian appearance and
significantly higher basal and 2-h plasma insulin levels than the control subjects. The serum gonadotropin, androgen, IGF-I and sex hormone
binding globulin (SHBG) levels were mostly normal . In another study of 25 women with GSD-Ia, 8/25 (32 %) patients had delayed menarche
(defined as ≥15 years of age), 12/25 (48 %) had irregular cycles, and 6/18 (33.3 %) had documented polycystic ovaries. In five patients with
GSD-Ia, five successful spontaneous pregnancies and one aided pregnancy were reported . The mechanisms of these abnormalities were unclear.
Sechi et al. found an association between age at GSD-Ia diagnosis and age at menarche (p = 0.0068) and between age at starting a corn
starch-based diet and age at menarche (p = 0.01). They concluded that an early diagnosis with early implementation of a corn starch-based
diet might prevent delayed puberty. The patient in this case had a normal ovarian appearance and female hormone levels but irregular cycles
and infertility, which might be more complicated, involving other medical conditions, hormonal changes, and psychological and social
factors. G6PC contains five exons encompassing 12.5 kb on chromosome 17q21. At present, over 100 mutations have been reported. However, only
a limited number of mutations account for the majority of GSD-Ia cases, among which, c.648G>T (p.L216L), a splicing mutation, and c.248G>A
(p.R83H), a missense mutation, are the most prevalent mutations in the Chinese, Japanese, and Korean populations [22, 23], whereas c.247C>T
(p.R83C) and c.1039C>T (p.Q347X) are the most prevalent mutations among Caucasians . The G6Pase protein is a nine-trans-membrane protein
with two binding sites (loci 83 and 170) and two active sites (loci 119 and 176) . In the present case, c.190G>T encoded a missense
mutation, p.V64L, in trans-membrane helix-2, whereas c.508C>T encoded a nonsense mutation of p.R170X in the second binding site (Fig. 1).
The trans-membrane helices are crucial for correct folding, and abnormal proteins are designated for degradation . The p.W63R/p.G68R
mutation in helix-2 was shown to result in reduced levels of the G6Pase protein , whereas the p.M121V mutation in helix-3, found in patients
9 and 10, resulted in 7.8 % of normal activity during an in vitro expression study . The binding sites (loci 83 and loci 170) and active
sites (loci 119 and 176) compose the catalytic center, and mutations at these sites, namely p.R83C, p.R83H, p.H119L, p.R170Q, and p.H176A,
completely abolish G6Pase enzymatic activity . Carves et al. reported a young male patient with no enzymatic activity in a liver biopsy
specimen who was found to possess a heterozygous p.R83C/p.M5V mutation. Thus, although we did not test enzymatic function, the p.V64L/p.170X
mutation could be assumed to impair normal protein function. Of the five cases reviewed here with tested enzymatic activity, the patient
(patient 11) with partial enzymatic function deficiency (2.40 ± 1.98 μmol Pi min−1 g−1, normal 4.7 ± 1.9 μmol Pi min−1 g−1) had a relatively
mild manifestation of GSD-Ia, whereas the remaining four patients (patients 3, 4, 6, and 8) with complete enzymatic function deficiency
presented with early and typical manifestations of GSD-Ia. Thus, the clinically mild GSD-Ia phenotype in the present case might be related
to a partial enzymatic deficiency. However, one GSD-Ia patient with a homozygous p.P257L mutation, which revealed only 1.2 % of normal
activity during an in vitro expression study, had a mild phenotype , whereas another patient with a composite heterozygous p.E110Q/p.G222R
mutation, which retained 17 and 4 % of normal activity, respectively, manifested typical severe symptoms . Variable phenotypes with the same
G6PC genotype have been reported . Thus, a genotype-phenotype correlation is lacking, and other modifying factors and/or genes might be
present that affect the phenotype of GSD-Ia patients. Frequent ingestion of uncooked corn starch is the main treatment for GSD-Ia and might
improve growth and reduce mortality . Potassium citrate is preferred to correct lactic acidosis . Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor
that blocks uric acid production, can effectively lower the SUA level, whereas uricosuric agents were not effective . Liver transplantation
was reported in one patient with gout (Patient 8). However, that patient’s SUA level increased from 484 to 711 μmol/L after transplantation,
and he suffered from gout flares even after other serological parameters returned to normal . Few reports exist on the treatment of GSD-Ia-
related menstruation abnormalities, but early dietary intervention might be associated with correction of menstruation . The patient in this
report was advised to ingest complex carbohydrates as her main diet and to have frequent snacks between meals. She was also administered
allopurinol with low-dose colchicine for gout flare prophylaxis. The tophi on her feet were removed surgically to enable normal walking. At
the time of completion of this manuscript, her SUA level was 360 μmol/L, and she was preparing for in vitro fertilization. In conclusion,
here, we report the case of one female premenopausal gout patient with multiple metabolic abnormalities and infertility, who was finally
diagnosed with GSD-Ia caused by a novel composite heterozygous mutation, c.190G>T/c.508C>T, encoding a missense mutation (p.V64V) in one
trans-membrane helix and a nonsense mutation (p.R170X) in a binding site. Glycogen storage disease should be considered in young female
patients with gout and hyperuricemia. This study was supported by the Research Special Fund for Public Welfare Industry of Health
(201302008, 201502024) None.
