Renal cell carcinoma is a potentially lethal cancer with aggressive behavior and it tends to metastasize. Renal cell carcinoma involves the
inferior vena cava in approximately 15 % of cases and it rarely extends into the right atrium. A majority of renal cell carcinoma are
detected as incidental findings on imaging studies obtained for unrelated reasons. At presentation, nearly 25 % of patients either have
distant metastases or significant local-regional disease with no symptoms that can be attributed to renal cell carcinoma. A 64-year-old
Indian male with a past history of coronary artery bypass graft surgery, congestive heart failure, and diabetes mellitus complained of
worsening shortness of breath for 2 weeks. Incidentally, a transthoracic echocardiography showed a “thumb-like” mass in his right atrium
extending into his right ventricle through the tricuspid valve with each systole. Abdomen magnetic resonance imaging revealed a heterogenous
lobulated mass in the upper and mid-pole of his right kidney with a tumor extending into his inferior vena cava and right atrium, consistent
with our diagnosis of advanced renal cell carcinoma which was later confirmed by surgical excision and histology. Radical right nephrectomy,
lymph nodes clearance, inferior vena cava cavatomy, and complete tumor thrombectomy were performed successfully. Perioperatively, he did not
require cardiopulmonary bypass or deep hypothermic circulatory arrest. He had no recurrence during the follow-up period for more than
2 years after surgery. Advanced extension of renal cell carcinoma can occur with no apparent symptoms and be detected incidentally. In rare
circumstances, atypical presentation of renal cell carcinoma should be considered in a patient presenting with right atrial mass detected by
echocardiography. Renal cell carcinoma with inferior vena cava and right atrium extension is a complex surgical challenge, but excellent
results can be obtained with proper patient selection, meticulous surgical techniques, and close perioperative patient care. The online
version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13256-016-0888-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) is a potentially lethal cancer with aggressive behavior and it tends to metastasize. RCC may present atypically with rare
metastatic sites [1, 2]. Intravascular tumor growth along the renal vein into the inferior vena cava (IVC) occurs in up to 15 % of all
patients with RCC and further extension of the tumor reaching the right atrium (RA) will be found in approximately 1 % of all patients . In
a routine clinic follow-up, a 64-year-old Indian male with a past history of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery, congestive heart
failure, and diabetes mellitus complained of worsening shortness of breath for 2 weeks. He reported normal urination and had no fever or
weight loss. He had no past history or family history of cancer. On examination, he was obese (BMI 38 kg/m2), his radial pulse was regular
(95/minute), afebrile, and his blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg. Cardiovascular examinations revealed a mid-line sternotomy scar, displaced
apex beat, and diminution of heart sounds with no murmur. Fine crepitations were heard in his lung bases bilaterally. His liver and spleen
were not enlarged. The results of the remainder of his examinations were normal. His laboratory results were as follows: hemoglobin,
13 g/dl; leukocyte count, 7.4×109/L; platelet count, 159×109/L; serum creatinine, 90 μmol/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 15 IU/L; and
urinalysis revealed plenty of microscopic red blood cells. His chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly and his ECG showed sinus rhythm with
nonspecific T inversion at lateral leads. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed impaired left ventricular systolic function with
ejection fraction of 40 %, and a large, highly mobile, “thumb-like” mass in the RA extending into right ventricle through the tricuspid
valve with each systole (Fig. 1; see Additional files 1 and 2). His tricuspid valve function was normal. Abdomen magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) revealed a heterogenous lobulated mass (measuring 6.8×8.4×4.2 cm) in the upper and mid-pole of his right kidney suggestive of right
RCC, with tumor thrombus extended into his IVC (infrahepatic, intrahepatic, and suprahepatic) and RA (Figs. 2 and 3). The imaging findings
were consistent with a diagnosis of RCC level IV, classified according to the upper margin of the tumor in his IVC . The diagnosis of RCC
(clear cell type), Fuhrman grade 2, measuring 200×50×60 mm of total tumor size was confirmed later by histopathologic examination of the
surgical specimens. Abdominal and thorax computed tomography (CT) was done for the purpose of tumor staging. Similar findings were found on
CT scan with no evidence of distant metastasis. He was hospitalized for anticoagulation and heart failure therapy. Angiographic CABG
conduits were assessed prior to surgery. Native coronary vessels were diffusely diseased. His left internal mammary artery graft and
saphenous venous grafts were collectively normal. Subsequently, he underwent right nephrectomy, cavatomy, and thrombectomy successfully. The
imaging findings were confirmed on surgical excision and histology. Findings from the nephrectomy specimen showed that the tumor was
protruding from his renal vein and extended to the superior pole of his kidney. Grossly, the outer surface of his kidney was fairly smooth
and lobulated and had not breached the renal capsule. Histopathologic examination showed the malignant cells were mainly clear cytoplasm
with a distinct cell membrane; they exhibited fairly uniform, round, slightly irregular, vesicular nuclei with small nucleoli. The tumor
infiltrated the renal parenchyma and extended into his renal capsule but did not invade his perirenal fat or Gerota’s fascia. The tumor
extended into his renal pelvis and his dilated renal vein, and it adhered to the vessel wall. Finally, there was no evidence of recurrence
(confirmed by repeat abdomen MRI and TTE) during the follow-up period for more than 2 years after surgery at our out-patient clinic.Fig.
1Apical four-chamber (a) and subcostal (b) views by transthoracic echocardiography showing the large mobile mass (white arrow) from inferior
vena cava moving into right atrium and right ventricleFig. 2Axial T2-weighted fat saturation (a) and balanced turbo field echo (b) images
showing the heterogenous right renal mass with cystic component (arrow) and formation of tumor thrombus in the dilated right renal vein
(yellow asterisk) which protrudes into the intrahepatic inferior vena cava (white triangle)Fig. 3Coronal balanced turbo field echo images
showing right renal mass (yellow asterisk) (a) with tumor thrombus in the engorged right renal vein (white triangle) extends cranially into
the intrahepatic and suprahepatic inferior vena cava (white arrow) encroaching into the right atrium (b) Apical four-chamber (a) and
subcostal (b) views by transthoracic echocardiography showing the large mobile mass (white arrow) from inferior vena cava moving into right
atrium and right ventricle Axial T2-weighted fat saturation (a) and balanced turbo field echo (b) images showing the heterogenous right
renal mass with cystic component (arrow) and formation of tumor thrombus in the dilated right renal vein (yellow asterisk) which protrudes
into the intrahepatic inferior vena cava (white triangle) Coronal balanced turbo field echo images showing right renal mass (yellow
asterisk) (a) with tumor thrombus in the engorged right renal vein (white triangle) extends cranially into the intrahepatic and suprahepatic
inferior vena cava (white arrow) encroaching into the right atrium (b) We reported a case of RCC with insidious presentation detected
incidentally. The clinical course of our patient was subtle. He did not present with the classical triad of hematuria, flank pain, or flank
mass, and had no apparent symptoms despite extension of the tumor thrombus into his IVC and RA. The diagnosis of RCC was considered after
accidental detection of his RA mass by TTE. Common differential diagnoses of right atrial mass include thrombus (pulmonary emboli), cardiac
tumors (primary or metastatic), and tricuspid valve vegetations, whereas uncommon differential diagnoses of right atrial mass include
anatomic variants, coronary fistula, indwelling catheter, and pacer wires. With the more liberal use of radiological imaging techniques in
current practice, the incidental finding of right atrial mass is particularly important for cardiologists, radiologists, or sonographers and
the diagnosis of RCC should always be taken into consideration. A similar presentation of RCC extension into RA had been reported earlier in
a series of case reports [3, 5, 6]. The majority (>70 %) of RCC are detected as incidental findings on imaging studies obtained for
unrelated reasons . At presentation, nearly 25 % of patients either have distant metastases or significant local-regional disease with no
symptoms that can be attributed to renal cell carcinoma. One of the striking characteristics of RCC is its tendency to invade the renal
vein, in which it may grow as a solid column of cells that extends up the IVC, sometimes as far as the right side of the heart . Surgical
treatment in patients with RCC extending into RA is challenging and controversy still exists regarding the safest strategy. The radical
surgical strategy may include extracorporeal circulation with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and sometimes deep hypothermic circulatory arrest
(DHCA) . Long-term survival is possible and the operative approach has been described earlier [4, 9]. For our patient, care was taken
perioperatively since the surgical approach was complex and our patient had a past history of CABG. Fortunately, radical right nephrectomy,
lymph nodes clearance, IVC cavatomy, and complete tumor thrombectomy (Fig. 4) were accomplished by a urologist in collaboration with a
cardiothoracic surgeon. Although we considered CPB and DHCA in our preoperative plan, our patient did not require them. The reason was that
he had a previous CABG which may have complicated the surgery. Furthermore, based on MRI findings the tumor thrombus in his IVC and RA did
not adhere to adjacent structures. During surgical exploration, the surgeons managed to extract the tumor thrombus en bloc via the division
of his right renal vein to his IVC. Histological analysis confirmed the diagnosis of clear cell type, the most common subtype of RCC,
Fuhrman grade 2.Fig. 4Surgically excised right renal tumor, cavatomy, and complete tumor thrombectomy Surgically excised right renal tumor,
cavatomy, and complete tumor thrombectomy Advanced extension of RCC can occur with no apparent symptoms and be detected incidentally. In
rare circumstances, atypical presentation of RCC should be considered in a patient presenting with right atrial mass detected by
echocardiography. RCC with IVC and RA extension is a complex surgical challenge, but excellent results can be obtained with proper patient
selection, meticulous surgical techniques and close perioperative patient care. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Additional file 1: Apical four chamber view by tranthoracic echocardiography. Renal cell carcinoma extending into ventricle
with cardiac motion. (WMV 841 kb) Additional file 2: Inferior vena cava view by transthoracic echocardiography. A "thumb-like" lesion
protruding into right atrium and right ventricle. (WMV 833 kb) Apical four chamber view by tranthoracic echocardiography. Renal cell
carcinoma extending into ventricle with cardiac motion. (WMV 841 kb) Inferior vena cava view by transthoracic echocardiography. A "thumb-
like" lesion protruding into right atrium and right ventricle. (WMV 833 kb) coronary artery bypass graft cardiopulmonary bypass computed
tomography deep hypothermic circulatory arrest inferior vena cava magnetic resonance imaging right atrium renal cell carcinoma transthoracic
echocardiography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions HTL is the first
author who treated the patient, organized the investigations, wrote the first draft of manuscript, scanned the photographs for submission,
and obtained patient consent. JLC and NO provided imaging comments on this case. SV and SO did the surgery. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
