Bronchogenic cysts (BC) are congenital abnormalities that occur most commonly within the mediastinum, and rarely occur within the diaphragm.
We present the 21st case of an intradiaphragmatic bronchogenic cyst in the English literature, and review all previous published cases.
Analysis includes presenting clinical symptoms, relevant radiologic studies, surgical approaches to resection, and management of the
diaphragm, among other relevant data. These lesions should remain on the differential diagnosis in cases of unusual masses in the region of
the diaphragm. Bronchogenic cysts (BC) are congenital abnormalities that arise from the ventral foregut and occur most commonly within the
mediastinum. Bronchogenic cysts rarely occur within the diaphragm. Up to June 2015, there were twenty cases of intradiaphragmatic
bronchogenic cysts reported in the English literature. We present a case of bronchogenic cyst located within the diaphragm in an adult male
patient. This lesion was removed via a left thoracotomy approach and diagnosis was confirmed with surgical pathology. A 41 year old male
presented with 6 months of back pain located around his lumbar spine. He had no history of trauma. An MRI of the spine revealed an ovoid
soft tissue structure located medially at the left lung base, measuring approximately 4.5 cm by 5 cm (Fig. 1). Due to its hyper intense
signal, it was thought to possibly represent a bronchogenic or proteinaceous cyst. The mass was further characterized by a CT scan of the
chest which demonstrated a homogeneous soft tissue mass embedded within the posterior medial crus of the left hemidiaphragm, measuring 5.3 ×
2.3 × 5.9 cm (Fig. 2). An old CT had previously identified the mass and it had increased in size compared with ten years ago. The patient
was otherwise asymptomatic with no complaints of chest pain, shortness of breath, weight loss, or abdominal pain. Physical examination of
the patient revealed only mild mid thoracic spine tenderness.Fig. 1Axial and sagittal slices of MRI thoracic spine without contrast denoting
a 5 cm × 4.5 cm ovoid hyperintense soft tissue structure medially at left lung base possible a bronchogenic cystFig. 2Axial and coronal
slices of CT chest with contrast depicting a smoothly marginated and homogenous 5.3 cm × 2.3 cm × 5.9 cm soft tissue mass embedded within
the muscle fibers of the crus of the left posterior medial hemidiaphragm with hounsfield of 60 units Axial and sagittal slices of MRI
thoracic spine without contrast denoting a 5 cm × 4.5 cm ovoid hyperintense soft tissue structure medially at left lung base possible a
bronchogenic cyst Axial and coronal slices of CT chest with contrast depicting a smoothly marginated and homogenous 5.3 cm × 2.3 cm × 5.9 cm
soft tissue mass embedded within the muscle fibers of the crus of the left posterior medial hemidiaphragm with hounsfield of 60 units The
patient was taken to the operating room for a left posterolateral serratus sparing thoracotomy with resection of the left diaphragmatic
mass. The diaphragm was reconstructed with a synthetic patch. The post-operative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged home
on post-operative day five. Final pathology was consistent with a benign intradiaphragmatic bronchogenic cyst with clear margins. The mass
was composed of benign ciliated respiratory epithelium, cartilage and seromucinous glands surrounded by benign skeletal muscle. We performed
a combined MEDLINE, PubMed, ScienceDirect, and SCOPUS Database search for “bronchogenic cyst” AND “diaphragm” without date limitations. Case
reports of intradiaphragmatic bronchogenic cysts were selected for analysis and review. Non-English language articles were excluded.
Citations of these case reports were inspected for references to other case reports, and these were investigated for appropriateness and
included if relevant. Patient demographics, case specifics, including imaging, and details of operative approach were noted in each case
report and pooled together for analysis. If a particular case report did not include pertinent data, such as operative approach or
diaphragmatic management, they were excluded from that particular analysis. A total of twenty English language case reports for
intradiaphragmatic bronchogenic cysts were published from 1952 to 2014. The age of presentation varied significantly and ranged from
19 months to 74 years old, with a mean age of 42.7 years old. 57 % (12/21) of the patients were female. 71.4 % (15/21) presented on the left
side. Most frequently, presentation was either for back pain or cough, each of which were present in 19 % (4/21) (Table 1). Other common
symptoms on presentation included chest pain, abdominal pain, or weight loss in 14 % (3/21) each. Prior to 1995, in the era pre-dating
widespread tomography (CT), chest radiography (CXR) was the predominate mode of diagnosis. In the CT era, all cases involved CT at some
point in the diagnostic workup, either when CXR was negative or to further characterize lesions seen on other modalities. CXR was negative
in two patients with subsequent CT identifying the diaphragmatic lesion. Upper gastrointestial barium series and ultrasonography were also
performed as part of patients’ workup, but were rarely diagnostic. The most likely preoperative diagnoses varied significantly, but these
lesions were most commonly confused with adrenal masses (Table 2).Table 1Clinical PresentationPresenting signs and symptomsPercentageBack
pain19 %Cough19 %Asymptomatic14 %Chest pain14 %Abdominal pain14 %Weight Loss14 %Fatigue10 %Hiccups10 %Flank
pain10 %Urgency5 %Incontinence5 %Nausea5 %Vomiting5 %Dyspnea5 %Fever of Unknown Origin5 %Table 2Presumed Diagnosis Prior to
ResectionAuthorYearDiagnosisElemen 2008Hydatid CystZugel 2008Symptomatic cystic liver tumorChang 2006Metastatic focus of hepatocellular
carcinomaChang 2006Lung massWesphal 2003Diaphragmatic herniaLiou 2001Posterior mediastinal tumorDesrumaux 2001Posterior mediastinal
tumorHoang 1999Adrenal massRozenblit 1998Adrenal cystSubramaniam 1996Adrenal tumorDagenais 1995NeurofibromaBuddington 1957Adrenal
massKesseler 1955Diaphramatic cyst Clinical Presentation Presumed Diagnosis Prior to Resection When commented on, CT reports most commonly
describe these lesions as homogeneous soft tissue hypoenhancing masses. The mean CT Hounsfield units were 38.3 ± 13.5. Calcification was
present in three patients, and described as combined linear and nodular. MRI was performed in four patients to further characterize the
lesions. MRI noted the majority to be T1/T2 hyperintense, but classification of them varied as either solid, soft tissue, or cystic lesions.
The largest lesion was 10 cm and the mean size was 6.19 ± 2.58 cm. Surgical approach varied, but was most commonly performed via a
posterolateral thoracotomy (47.4 %; 9/19) (Table 3). Laparotomy, thoracoscopy, and a thoracoabdominal approach were the next most common
utilized approach at 15.8 % (3/19) each, respectively (Table 4). All reported cases resulted in complete removal of the bronchogenic cyst.
The specifics of reconstruction of the diaphragm were variable, and frequently not reported. Reconstruction was accomplished via primary
closure in 69.2 % (9/13). Three cases (23.1 %) reported the use of prosthetic material to bridge a large diaphragmatic defect.Table
3Approaches to ResectionSurgical approachPercentThoracotomy47.4 % (9/19)Laparotomy15.8 % (3/19)Thoracoabdominal15.8 %
(3/19)Thoracoscopy15.8 % (3/19)Laparoscopy5.3 % (1/19)Table 4Case Reports and DetailsAuthorYearAgeSexSurgical ApproachDiaphragmatic
ManagementCommentsMubang201541MaleThoracotomyGore-tex patch reconstructionSerratus sparing thoracotomyHerek 201442MaleN/AN/ASubramanian
201313MaleThoracoscopyPrimary closureInterrupted suturesJiang 201338FemaleThoracotomyPrimary closureInterrupted figure of eight suturesKim
201156FemaleThoracotomyGore-tex patch reconstructionConversion from thoracoscopic approachElemen 20081.6FemaleLaparotomyNo diaphragmatic
injuryZugel 200843FemaleLaparoscopyPrimary closureInterrupted 2–0 EthibondChang 200674FemaleThoracoscopyN/AChang
200654FemaleThoracoscopyN/AAnile 200638FemaleThoracotomyN/AWestphal 200332FemaleThoracotomyProlene mesh reconstructionNon-absorbable
suturesLiou 200134MaleThoracotomyPrimary closureDesrumaux 200150MaleN/AN/AHoang 199951MaleLaparotomyN/ARozenblit
199864FemaleLaparotomyN/ASubramaniam 199650MaleThoracoabdominalPrimary closure11th rib resection performed; interrupted 2–0 vicryl
suturesDagenais 199551FemaleThoracoabdominalPrimary closureGourlay 196641MaleThoracotomyPrimary closureInterrupted silk suturesAaron
196421FemaleThoracotomyPrimary closureTwo layer closureBuddington 195762MaleThoracoabdominalPrimary closureSilk mattress suturesKesseler
195541FemaleThoracotomyN/A Approaches to Resection Case Reports and Details On gross examination, six (28.6 %) were noted to be
multilocular, while three (14.3 %) were unilocular, with the remaining not describing loculations. Four cases (19.0 %) described
calcification present in specimen, three noting the calcification to be focal. One of these cases did not show radiologic evidence of
calcification. All pathologic analysis denoted absence of malignancy; however, two cases denoted the presence of squamous metaplasia within
the resected bronchogenic cyst. Sample size would limit any analysis of predictors of metaplasia in this series. Bronchogenic cysts are
congenital lesions that are thought to arise from an abnormally budding ventral foregut, which then develops into a blind ending fluid
filled pouch . However, the exact embryologic development of these cysts is currently unclear . Given that they likely arise from
embryologic error, bronchogenic cysts are also associated with other congenital pulmonary malformations, such as congenital lobar emphysema
or pulmonary sequestration . On occasion, bronchogenic cysts may harbor malignancy, and the presence of a bronchogenic cyst necessitates
surgical resection . While commonly located in the mediastinum, the intradiaphragmatic location is exceedingly rare, and our case documents
the twenty-first case in the English literature . Symptoms that are seen are frequently nonspecific and may not be related to the
bronchogenic cyst itself, but rather prompting workup, which then reveals the lesion. When symptoms arise, typically patients present with
pain, but they can also have respiratory symptoms such as intermittent or persistent cough. Symptoms are likely due to compression or
irritation of adjacent structures. Bronchogenic cysts, as a group, can also present with symptoms from cyst communication with aerodigestive
structures, bleeding, or localized infections, but none of these were present with bronchogenic cysts in the intradiaphragmatic location .
Imaging studies have an increasingly important role in the diagnosis or suggestion of intradiaphragmatic bronchogenic cysts. Compared with
mediastinal bronchogenic cysts, intradiaphragmatic lesions have similar CT and MRI characteristics, but they are not completely diagnostic.
A combined approach utilizing multiple modalities of imaging may help to characterize these lesions, but given their rarity, are often
difficult diagnoses to make on imaging alone. Due to this, surgical resection remains necessary for diagnosis . It appears as though
surgical approaches for resection of these lesions are dependent on the most likely diagnosis as well as the anticipated extent of
diaphragmatic reconstruction. Frequently, preoperative localization of these lesions are difficult, and they may be mistakenly thought to be
either within the abdominal or thoracic cavities, rather than within the diaphragm itself. However, our review notes that virtually all
approaches are suitable for successful resection of intradiaphragmatic bronchogenic cysts, including minimally invasive approaches. We can
speculate that minimally invasive approaches would yield improved short term outcomes, but with such a small sample size, and each unique
case presenting its own challenges, we could only speculate as to that conclusion. The pathologic hallmark of bronchogenic cysts is the
presence of ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium, cartilage, and smooth muscle within the cyst wall. Grossly, there is a variable
presentation, which likely contributes to their variable radiologic appearance. Reason for resection of these lesions is their unclear
diagnosis, potential for harboring malignancy, infectious complications, erosive complications, and symptomatology, if present . While
pathologic analysis did not reveal evidence of malignancy present in any of the cases, the presence of squamous metaplasia in two cases,
suggests their malignant potential and raises the possibility of stepwise carcinogenesis in these lesions . Intradiaphragmatic bronchogenic
cysts are very rare, and this review characterizes the variable nature of clinical presentation, radiologic appearance, surgical techniques,
and pathology. These lesions should remain on the differential diagnosis in cases of unusual masses in the region of the diaphragm.
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions RM: Manuscript drafting, acquisition
of data, analysis of data. JB: Manuscript drafting, acquisition of data, analysis of data. MM: Acquisition of data. WB: Acquisition of data,
intellectual critique. MP: Acquisition of data, intellectual critique. All authors read and approve the final manuscript.
