Aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm formation is one of the vascular complications of Behcet disease. At present, the optimal treatment for the
disease has not been established. The authors report a case of vasculo-Behcet disease (v-BD) with recurrent pseudoaneurysms in the left
infrainguinal arteries (common femoral artery, superficial femoral artery, and popliteal artery), as well as thrombosis in the popliteal
vein and posterior tibial vein. The patient underwent 3 rounds of surgery, but developed a new pseudoaneurysm several months after each
surgery. Eventually, the patient was successfully treated with a combination of endovascular repair, using a fully covered stent graft, and
prednisone. The pseudoaneurysm regressed without recurrence for more than 1 year. For v-BD, treatment with immunosuppressive therapy alone
may not be sufficient to prevent the recurrence of pseudoaneurysms. For the endovascular treatment of pseudoaneurysms affecting the
infrainguinal arteries in v-BD, a fully covered stent graft without oversizing is essential to prevent the recurrence of pseudoaneurysms.
Behcet disease (BD) is a type of systemic vasculitis characterized by oral and genital ulcers, uveitis, and a variety of skin and mucosal
lesions. In addition, it can affect the vascular, gastrointestinal, and neurological systems.1 When the vascular system is involved in BD,
it is termed as vasculo-BD (v-BD), which may present with thrombosis and superficial phlebitis in the venous system, and aneurysm, stenosis,
and occlusion in the arterial system. The incidence of vascular involvement varies from 7% to 38% in patients with BD,2 and venous
manifestations are more frequent than arterial ones.3 BD with arterial lesions showed poor prognosis in these patients due to the occurrence
of complications such as rupture of aneurysm and arterial occlusion.4 To avoid these life-threatening complications, surgical intervention
with graft interposition of these arterial lesions is necessary. However, postoperative complications, such as anastomotic pseudoaneurysm or
occlusion of the stent graft, are frequently seen.5,6 In recent years, endovascular treatment of arterial lesions in BD has been performed,
and the results showed that it was effective and safe, with an acceptable vascular complication rate and excellent patency of the treated
site.7 Nonetheless, the outcomes of endovascular intervention in BD and the experience with stent graft placement for patients with BD still
need to be investigated further. In this paper, we report a patient with v-BD with recurrent pseudoaneurysms in the left infrainguinal
arteries. This patient was eventually cured by endovascular treatment with an appropriate covered stent graft (CSG). Ethical statement: this
study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). As our case report does
not violate the patient's privacy, informed consent is not necessary. A 56-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our surgical ward because of
a rapidly growing mass in the left thigh, with progressive and intermittent pain and numbness. The patient denied any history of trauma,
drug abuse, or infective endocarditis. The patient was diagnosed as having BD a year before because of recurrent erythema nodosum, and oral
and genital aphthous ulcers persisting for 1 year. In addition, at the time of diagnosis, the pathergy test result was positive, and
laboratory test results showed erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 84 mm/hour (reference range 0–15 mm/hour) and C-reactive protein
(CRP) of 102.5 mg/L (reference range 0–8 mg/L). Antinuclear antibody and other autoantibodies, such as antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
and anticardiolipin antibody, all tested negative. After diagnosis, immunosuppressive therapy using oral prednisone 20 mg and sulfasalazine
100 mg daily was initiated. A month later, the levels of ESR and CRP were gradually reduced to the normal range. The patient was then
discharged on a regimen of prednisone 20 mg daily. A computed tomographic angiogram (CTA) and an ultrasonography revealed a left femoral
artery pseudoaneurysm measuring 10 × 10 cm (Figure 1B). In addition, thromboses were found in the left popliteal vein and posterior tibial
vein. Laboratory tests showed that the levels of ESR and serum CRP were within the normal range. The femoral artery pseudoaneurysm was soon
resected, and graft interposition using an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene vascular graft was performed. Anticoagulant therapy
(subcutaneous injection of enoxaparin, 4.25 kU per day for 15 days, followed by oral warfarin for another 6 months) was administered to
treat extremity vein thromboses. Endovascular treatment of BD with recurrent infrainguinal arterial pseudoaneurysms: a case report and
literature review. (A) A sketched map with a time axis showing the therapeutic treatments and follow-up examinations of the reported patient
with v-BD. Colored pie charts represent specific events (surgery, recurrence, or no recurrence) at each time point. (B–I) CT angiography of
the infrainguinal arteries or arteriogram of the reported patient with v-BD at time points as indicated in (A). For Figure 1C, Figures 1C1
and 2 are the CT angiograms of this patient obtained before and after endovascular treatment, respectively. Figures 1C3 and 4 are the
arteriograms obtained before (C3) and immediately after (C4) the implantation of the covered stent graft during the endovascular treatment
of the aneurysm. Figures 1E and G, Figures 1E2, G2, E3, and G3 show the arteriograms obtained before (E2, G2) and immediately after (E3, G3)
the implantation of the covered stent-graft during the endovascular treatment of the aneurysm. BD = Behcet disease, CT = computed
tomographic, v-BD = vasculo-Behcet disease. Five months later, the patient developed a symptomatic recurrence at the surgical site. A CTA
revealed that there was a ruptured aneurysm of the left superficial femoral artery with active contrast extravasation (Figure 1C1). Thus,
the patient was immediately admitted to our hybrid operating room, and an endovascular CSG (Bard Fluency, 8 mm × 8 cm) was deployed over the
ruptured segment via the femoral approach. Completion angiogram (Figure 1C3) and CT angiography immediately after surgery (Figure 1C2) both
revealed aneurysm exclusion without contrast extravasation. After this surgery, the patient was discharged on a regimen of prednisone 20 mg
and aspirin 100 mg daily. Six months later, the patient remained asymptomatic. Follow-up CTA showed no residual aneurysm, endoleak, or any
sign of migration or new aneurysm formation (Figure 1D). However, 9 months after the 2nd surgery, the patient complained of a recurrent
pulsating subcutaneous mass and pain in his left thigh. Furthermore, dyskinesia and dysesthesia occurred in his left crus. CT angiography
revealed a ruptured aneurysm of the left superficial femoral artery, with a size of 7 × 5 cm (Figure 1E1). Moreover, an electromyogram
revealed that neural injuries in his left tibial nerve and left peroneal nerve. Consequently, the patient underwent a 3rd surgery. During
this surgery, endovascular treatment was initially attempted; however, the guidewire could not pass the ruptured aneurysm. Thus, we
proceeded to expose the pseudoaneurysm, and surprizingly discovered that the structure of the arterial wall at the ruptured site was
completely disrupted, and the anchoring barb of the CSG was exposed (Figure 2). We attributed the recurrence of the pseudoaneurym to the
stimulation of the anchoring barb of the CSG to the arterial wall, and to the frequent motions of the knee joint. We opted to use a Gore
Viabahn Endoprosthesis (VBC081502, 8 mm × 15 cm), instead of Fluency (8 mm × 8 cm) CSG, to repair the ruptured pseudoaneurysm. A completion
angiogram (Figure 1E3 and 4) demonstrated aneurysm exclusion without contrast extravasation. After this surgery, the patient felt that the
dyskinesia and dysesthesia of his left crus improved, and he underwent a rehabilitation program for 2 months at the Department of
Rehabilitation of our hospital to address the neural injury. Six months after this surgery, both follow-up CT angiography (Figure 1F) and
ultrasonic scan revealed that the pseudoaneurysm remained occluded, and there was no sign of leakage or endoleak. Intraoperative appearance
during the 3rd surgery of the patient. (A) Clearance of the extravasated blood caused by rupture of pseudoaneurysm. (B) The structure of the
artery wall at the ruptured site is completely disrupted, and the anchoring barb of the covered stent-graft is exposed (arrowhead). (C)
Guidewire is inserted into the distal lumen of the artery. (D) After the repair of the pseudoaneurysm using a covered stent-graft. Thirteen
months after the 3rd surgery, the patient felt pain in his left thigh again, and repeat CTA revealed a pseudoaneurysm in the distal
anastomotic site of his left popliteal artery (Figure 1G1). The patient was then subjected to another surgery. To reduce the irritation of
the stent graft to the artery wall, we used a matched CSG without oversizing (Gore Viabahn VBC061502, 6 mm × 15 cm) to repair the ruptured
segment via a femoral approach. A completion angiogram (Figure 1G2 and 3) demonstrated aneurysm exclusion without contrast extravasation.
After this surgery, the follow-up CTA performed in both 6th (Figure 1H) and 12th month (Figure 1I) indicated successful patency without any
sign of leakage or migration of the stent graft. To date, the pseudoaneurysm has regressed without recurrence for more than 1 year and the
patient continues to take prednisone 10 mg per day. The progression of v-BD in the case reported in this article is summarized in Table 1.
Progression of Disease in the Case Reported in This Article v-BD is a type of vasculitis involving both veins and arteries. This can lead to
thromboses, occlusions, and aneurysms. The pathogenesis of v-BD is obliterative endarteritis involving the vasa vasorum of vessels. Thus,
the arterial lesions of v-BD can affect all types of arteries. Previous investigations reported that in patients with v-BD, the aorta is the
most common site of aneurysm formation, followed by the pulmonary and the femoral arteries.8 In addition, arterial aneurysms in v-BD are
usually isolated and frequently coexist with venous thromboses.9 Here, we report a male patient who showed v-BD with pseudoaneurysms of the
left femoral artery. In addition, thromboses in the popliteal vein and posterior tibial vein were also found in this patient. The patient
was diagnosed as having BD 16 months prior to the onset of symptoms of an aneurysm in his left thigh. When diagnosed, the levels of CRP and
ESR, which were tested to determine the activity of vasculitis, were higher than the normal range. Thus, this patient was treated with
corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents. The CRP and ESR levels returned to the normal range, suggesting that the activity of the
vasculitis was controlled. However, 14 months later the patient developed another pseudoaneurysm of the left femoral artery, and the
pseudoaneurysm recurred several times at the anastomotic site after surgery. During this period, the patient was under immunosuppressive
treatment and the levels of CRP and ESR were within normal range. Previous investigations reported that based on the characteristics of
vasculitis of v-BD, treatment of patients with v-BD with corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents could effectively reduce the risk of
development of anastomotic pseudoaneurysms after surgery.10,11 However, Kim et al7 reported that 2 among the 20 patients who received
immunosuppressive therapy before endovascular treatment, with ESRs within the normal range, developed anastomotic pseudoaneurysms even after
endovascular treatment. These reports are consistent with what our findings of this case. Although there is no specific laboratory marker
for BD, previous studies used ESR and/or CRP as a marker for monitoring the active state of the disease.12,13 However, there is no consensus
on the relationship between inflammatory parameters such as ESR or CRP and the severity or activity of vasculitis in v-BD. Taken together,
these results suggest that in patients with v-BD, treatment with immunosuppressive agents is not sufficient to prevent the development of
anastomotic pseudoaneurysms after surgery, and that the use of tests such as ESR and biomarkers such as CRP to determine the activity of
vasculitis is of limited value. Currently, there is no definitive therapeutic modality for v-BD with peripheral arterial lesions. We
reviewed v-BD cases with infrainguinal arterial aneurysms or pseudoaneurysms that received surgical interventions in the English literature.
The results are presented in Table 2. These results showed that open surgical intervention is the traditional treatment for v-BD with
infrainguinal arterial aneurysms. However, anastomotic or new aneurysms, thromboses, and graft occlusions are the most frequently
encountered complications after open surgical treatment of v-BD.1 Endovascular treatment of BD pseudoaneurysms is increasingly being
performed in recent years, and results showed higher technical success rates and lower procedure-related complication rates when compared
with traditional surgical interposition.7 Vasculitis is believed to be the pathogenesis of complications, such as aneurysm thrombosis and
graft occlusion in patients with v-BD after surgery,3 and endovascular treatment of BD aneurysms can result in advantages of reducing the
endothelial injury to the fragile arterial wall caused by vasculitis, and consequently decreasing the incidence of complications after
surgery. In this case, the 1st surgery performed to treat that the femoral artery aneurysm was an open surgical interposition using a
vascular graft; the aneurysm relapsed at the anastomotic site 6 months after this surgery. The subsequent treatments of the recurrent
aneurysms were all via endovascular interventions, except the 3rd surgery, in which the endovascular guidewire could not be passed through
the ruptured aneurysm successfully. The interval between endovascular treatments and therapeutic failures were 9 and 13 months. These
results support the current view that endovascular intervention of BD aneurysms has a lower rate of anastomotic pseudoaneurysm formation
than open surgery. Reported v-BD Cases With Infrainguinal Arterial Aneurysms7,12–24 The recurrences of pseudoaneurysms over the anastomotic
sites in this patient after stent-graft insertion gave us some suggestions in the selection of stent-grafts in the endovascular treatment of
v-BD: in the first recurrence after endovascular intervention of the BD aneurysm, we found that the formation of an anastomotic
pseudoaneurysm was possibly due to the chronic irritation of the fixing barb and naked edge of the Fluency CSG. Thus, we used the Viabahn
CSG with its two edges covered to repair the aneurysm. Considering that the site of the ruptured pseudoaneurysm is near the knee joint, and
frequent movement of the knee joint may aggravate the irritation in the arterial wall induced by the stent graft, we used the 15 cm Viabahn
CSG, keeping the proximal and distal landing zones far from the inflamed ruptured site and knee joint. Although we carefully inserted this
CSG to repair the ruptured BD aneurysm, the pseudoaneurysm recurred in the distal anastomotic site of the popliteal artery. To avoid
endoleak and migration of the stent-graft, selecting a CSG with a diameter that is 10% to 20% larger than the diameter of the vessels
(oversized) to the diameter of the vessels is the standard recommendation; however, the pressure of the oversized stent graft may damage the
arterial wall of v-BD patients. To further reduce the irritation caused by the stent-graft to the inflammatory arterial wall, we used a
matched Viabahn CSG without oversizing to repair the aneurysm this time. Although the risk of endoleak and migration of the stent-graft
increased, the stent-graft has been patent for nearly 12 months, without any sign of migration or new aneurysm formation until present.
Collectively, these results suggest that in the endovascular treatment of BD aneurysms, it is important to select an appropriate CSG to
minimize the repeated endothelial injury caused by the stent-graft to the vasculitic arterial wall, and consequently reduce the recurrence
of pseudoaneurysms. In conclusion, this case suggests that BD aneurysms might progress in patients with BD with normal CRP and ESR levels
under immunosuppressive therapy. Endovascular stent-graft repair of BD aneurysms is a safe alternative to open surgical treatment. The
irritation caused by a CSG to the vasculitic arterial wall is an important risk factor for the recurrence of anastomotic pseudoaneurysms in
patients with BD after endovascular treatment. Consequently, fully CSGs with matched sizes and sufficient length to keep the fixing barb far
from the inflammatory arterial wall of the aneurysm is recommended for endovascular repair of BD aneurysms. The authors thank Dr Si-su Yuan
(Department of Radiology, Tongji Hospital) for the 3-D reconstruction of the CT angiogram of this case. The authors also thank the National
Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 81401997 and 81500565) awarded to ZD and GJ. Abbreviations: BD = Behcet disease, CSG = covered stent
graft, CTA = computed tomographic angiogram, ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate, v-BD = vasculo-Behcet disease. This work is supported by
the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 81401997 and 81500565) The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
