Aggressive chondroblastoma of the distal tibia is rare, and below-knee amputation had been the standard surgical procedure. We reported an
additional case and reviewed the existing literature. A 20-year-old man with a 2-month history of right ankle pain and swelling underwent
distal tibia wide resection, double pedicle fibular, autogenous iliac bone graft, and ankle arthrodesis. He had no pain, no limitation in
daily activities, and no evidence of local recurrence and infection; the Musculoskeletal Tumour Society Score (MSTS) is 86 % at the final
follow-up. Double pedicel fibular graft and ankle arthrodesis may be an effective and economical alternative method for aggressive
chondroblastoma in the distal tibia. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12957-016-0839-z) contains supplementary material,
which is available to authorized users. Chondroblastoma of bone, considered a benign lesion, is an uncommon condition that has a
predilection for secondary ossification centers, particularly of the proximal humeral, tibia, and distal femur . It occurs predominantly in
the second decade, more commonly in males. At times, chondroblastoma may be aggressive in character. Primary malignant form as well as
malignant alteration in the form of chondrosarcoma has been reported in less than 10 % of cases . The ovoid lesion with thin sclerotic
margin, located centrally in the epiphysis expands rapidly, and its boundaries with the sponge bone are unclear. An adequate and rapid
diagnosis, including histological verification, is necessary before definitive treatment. Radical surgical resection including the tract of
previous biopsy or surgery, avoiding any adjuvant therapy, is indicated for aggressive tumors . Aggressive chondroblastoma of the distal
tibia is further rare. For patients with aggressive chondroblastoma, treatments including below-knee amputation and arthrodesis have been
recommended. With the development of limb salvage techniques, arthrodesis is becoming preferred. Among the options of arthrodesis,
vascularized free fibular and non-vascularized autogenous fibular grafts were regarded as the most chosen reconstruction according to
situations. In this report, we describe the successful wide resection of aggressive chondroblastoma and reconstruction with double pedicel
fibular graft and ankle arthrodesis. In April 2010, a 20-year-old man with a 2-month history of right ankle pain and swelling presented in
our hospital. His medical history was otherwise unremarkable. On physical examination, there was a mass with associated tenderness at the
posterolateral aspect of the distal tibia. There was 18° restriction of plantar flexion and a 5° restriction of dorsiflexion. Plain
radiograph and CT showed lytic lesions on posterolateral aspects of the distal tibia, and it appears as an ovoid lesion located centrally in
the epiphysis (Figs. 1 and 2). MRI showed that the osteological area expands and its boundaries are unclear. The tumor mass expands beyond
the lateral ankle and article surface of the distal tibia and protrudes into the soft tissue, but with the reservation of the fibula
(Fig. 3). An incisional biopsy revealed aggressive chondroblastoma with an aneurysmal bone cyst. Microscopic fields in the tumor region
showed highly cellular tissue, variably differentiated and with discrete granulated to meshy calcification of the matrix and large
multinuclear cells present in 20 % of cases. The cyst fields were characterized by blood-filled cavities (Fig. 4). The patient also had a
bone scan, chest radiograph, and CT of the lungs to determine if there are other metastases.Fig. 1Pre-operative X-ray shows the lesion
located in the distal of the right tibia. a Anteroposterior X-ray. b Lateral X-rayFig. 2Transection scan of CT shows that the cortex of the
distal tibia was destroyed by the tumor; however, fortunately, the medial malleolus was intact, and thus it gives us a chance to keep it. a
Anteroposterior CT. b Lateral CTFig. 3Pre-operative MRI shows that T1 low signal and T2 high signal of the lesion located in the distal of
the right tibia protruded into the soft tissue. a T1 MRI. b T2 MRFig. 4Microscopic image of aggressive Chondroblastoma showing the highly
cellular tissue, variably differentiated and with discrete granulated to meshy calcification of the matrix and large multinuclear cells
present in 20 % of cases. Magnification (×100) HE Pre-operative X-ray shows the lesion located in the distal of the right tibia. a
Anteroposterior X-ray. b Lateral X-ray Transection scan of CT shows that the cortex of the distal tibia was destroyed by the tumor; however,
fortunately, the medial malleolus was intact, and thus it gives us a chance to keep it. a Anteroposterior CT. b Lateral CT Pre-operative MRI
shows that T1 low signal and T2 high signal of the lesion located in the distal of the right tibia protruded into the soft tissue. a T1 MRI.
b T2 MR Microscopic image of aggressive Chondroblastoma showing the highly cellular tissue, variably differentiated and with discrete
granulated to meshy calcification of the matrix and large multinuclear cells present in 20 % of cases. Magnification (×100) HE
Posterolateral incisions were taken according to the site of biopsy and the position of the tumor. During the decomposition, the superficial
peroneal nerve was identified and was retracted laterally. The flexor muscle of the thumb was exposed from peroneal muscle gap, and the
muscle fibers were cut to the flexor muscle of the thumb, and, the remaining fibula periosteum and some muscle fibers were separated in the
fibula. In the separation process, resection of the distal fibular of 12 cm in length should be performed and proximal vascular ligation
should be also retained to form a distal pedicel fibula bone flap and peroneal artery including its branch vessels. After opening the
extensor retinaculum, the joint capsule was exposed and meticulous dissection was carried out to preserve a wide protective margin of the
tissue. Previous biopsy tracts were incorporated into the incision and completely excised with the specimen. According to the tumor position
determined by CT, the posterolateral and central parts of the distal tibia were resected from 1 cm proximal along with the tumor remaining
medial part. The soft tissue protruded by the tumor was also wide resected. After the fibula periosteum and the muscle fibers were separated
at the fibular head, the fibula head was resected to maintain long enough pedicel and articular cartilage of the talus and medial ankle were
eradicated while preparing two holes in the talus head. After distal fibular was folded up into two, the two pedicel graft were inserted
between the medullary canal of the tibia and the holes in the talus. Then, a titanium plate between the distal tibia and talus was fixed.
Attention should be taken to place the ankle in 50–100 valgus, 100 external rotation, and a neutral dorsiflexion. An autogenous iliac bone
graft was also inserted to fill the remaining defect in the tibia and recipient bed of the talus (Fig. 5). The patient’s ability to walk
depended on radiographic evidence of bony healing. In general, the patient was kept non-weight bearing for 3 months, then progressed to
full-weight bearing wearing a walking boot by 3 months, and was allowed to bear without wearing a boot beginning from 6 to 9 months. After
that time, the patient was able to walk independently without pain. The patients is now in the third year of follow-up and continues to be
free of pain and has had no further complains; plain radiographs show a solid bony union (Fig. 6).Fig. 5Post-operative X-ray shows the
reconstruction of the distal tibia defect. a AP X-ray. b Lateral X-rayFig. 6X-ray, 28 months after operation, shows the hypertrophy of the
fibula and union of the junctions of the tibia-fibula and the fibula-talus. a AP X-ray. b lateral X-ray Post-operative X-ray shows the
reconstruction of the distal tibia defect. a AP X-ray. b Lateral X-ray X-ray, 28 months after operation, shows the hypertrophy of the fibula
and union of the junctions of the tibia-fibula and the fibula-talus. a AP X-ray. b lateral X-ray Since chondroblastoma is a benign lesion
wholly, curettage and osteoplasty using auto- and homograft are the main method for chondroblastoma in most cases and additional implants
may be used if there is mechanical instability. For particularly aggressive tumors, marginal or wide resection is necessary. In exceptional
cases, amputation may be necessary when the soft tissue and neurovascular bundle are extensively involved . Tumors of the distal tibia are
quite rare. For malignant and potential malignant tumors, below-knee amputation had been the standard surgical procedure because of the
limitation of soft-tissue coverage and satisfactory function of below-knee prosthesis . Recently, social reasons and improved technique have
made limb salvage in the distal tibia increasingly possible . Among the many options of reconstruction, ankle endoprosthetic is not accepted
by most surgeons because of its high rate of complications . Arthrodesis was preferred, providing excellent stability of the ankle and
avoiding problem relating to prosthetic implantation. Arthrodesis with auto-graft is an economical, safe, and effective method without
complication of the rejection reaction and non-union, infection, osteolysis, fracture which carried by allograft. Compared with non-
vascularized autogenous fibular grafts, vascularized fibula was also superior to non-vascularized grafts with reduced time to union and
faster hypertrophy . Casadei reported good functional and oncological results in 12 patients with malignant bone tumors of the distal tibia,
treated by resection and arthrodesis with vascularized free autogenous bone graft . Bishop et al. also succeed in reconstruction using a
vascularized free fibular graft for the treatment of malignant tumors in the distal tibia . But in their cases, mobility of the donor site
and the complicated surgical procedure are a problem. Our retrospective case presents a different method of limb salvage in the treatment of
distal tibia tumors. Same as the other methods, wide resection is necessary and the resection needs to include articular surface, ligaments,
and the joint capsule. The local extent of the tumor also required resection of the most tibia to an extent that was incompatible with
reconstruction of the joint anatomy, so in the case, according to the tumor position, the medial malleolus remained to strengthen the
stability. Compared with the Casadei’s technique, we had not used the proximal and middle fibular graft but the distal fibular which can
obtain sufficient auto-graft of bone in the same incision. The distal fibular graft can get long enough pedicle after resecting the fibular
head and inserted between the tibia canal and talus which can provide an effective foundation of stability after doubling up. After that,
autogenous iliac bone grafts were inserted to fill the remaining defect between the tibia and talus. This compound reconstruction in which
procedure was simpler than the vascularized one was not the same totally with non-vascularized autogenous fibular grafts and had brought
about sound fusion and minimum. We used a plate and a screw as the fixation device in this patient because of enough soft tissue. This
procedure was also simpler than intramedullary nailing suggested by Moore’s series for shortage of the soft tissue. In our experience, wide
resection and reconstruction with double pedicel fibular graft and ankle arthrodesis is a valuable alternative in limb salvage for
aggressive chondroblastoma in the distal tibia. This technique avoids the donor site morbidity of auto-graft used, the talus collapse and
bone loss associated with an ankle endoprosthesis. After ankle arthrodesis, our patient had 20° of tibiopedal motion (Fig. 7) and no
complications of mal-union, pseudarthrosis, loss of internal fixation, post-operative infection, skin necrosis, and chronic edema at 4 years
of follow-up. There was no shortening of the lower extremity, and their gait was nearly normal (Additional file 1).Fig. 720° of tibiopedal
motion. a Plantar flexion of tibiopedal. b Dorsiflexion of tibiopedal 20° of tibiopedal motion. a Plantar flexion of tibiopedal. b
Dorsiflexion of tibiopedal Degenerative arthrosis may develop in the sub-talus joint after ankle arthrodesis . through there was no evidence
of arthrosis in the sub-talus or other joints of the foot in our patient; further longer follow-up clinical effect should take in next step.
We describe a novel technique of double pedicel fibular graft and ankle arthrodesis for aggressive chondroblastoma in the distal tibia. This
technique allowed for retention of protective motor function and avoidance of ankle immobilization, while providing no pain, no limitation
in daily activities, and no evidence of local recurrence and infection, 86 % of MSTS score, and patient satisfaction compared with
traditional below-knee prosthesis after amputation. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
manuscript and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Additional file 1: The gait was nearly normal on 28 months after operation. (MPEG 10400 kb) The gait was nearly normal on 28 months after
operation. (MPEG 10400 kb) Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. JF read and wrote the manuscript. SL prepared the figures and wrote the manuscript. JM collected the
literature data. GY designed and arranged this article. This research was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai, China
(ID:14ZR1437800) and the Foundation of Shanghai Municipal Bureau of Health (ID:20134328)
