Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a malignant tumor which involves the striated muscle, and it is most common in the pediatric age group. Usually,
children with RMS present with persistent ear discharge, aural polyp and hearing loss which are similar to the symptoms seen in chronic
otitis media (COM). This similarity with COM often delays the diagnosis. The histological diagnosis of RMS is always a challenge because
there are many other conditions which exhibit similar characteristic features such as an aural polyp. We discussed an unusual case of RMS in
a 15-month-old girl who presented with acute otitis media (AOM) and mastoid abscess. The biopsy of the aural polyp confirmed the diagnosis.
A 15-month-old girl presented with a history of right ear discharge for 1 month. Otoscopic examination was performed, and a polyp was
observed. The tissue was sent for histopathological examination, and the report suggested pyogenic granuloma. Subsequently, she developed
right facial asymmetry and mastoid swelling for 3 days. Clinically, the child was active, despite high-grade temperature at 38.7Â°C. There
was a right mastoid swelling which was tender, inflamed, and fluctuant. Otoscopic examination revealed polypoidal tissue obscuring the view
of the tympanic membrane. There was House-Brackmann Grade IV right facial nerve paresis. Diagnosis of right AOM with mastoid abscess was
made. A high-resolution computed tomography of temporal showed extensive bony erosion of the right tegmen tympani and cortex of mastoid with
soft tissue filling up the ear canal and middle ear [Figure 1]. A ring enhancing collection was observed in the soft tissue adjacent to the
mastoid, and it was suggestive of an abscess formation. No hearing assessment was performed as the patient was admitted after office hours
and audiology services were unavailable. She underwent examination under anesthesia and right cortical mastoidectomy with drainage of
postauricular abscess which communicated with the external ear canal. High-resolution computed tomography temporal of the patient showed
extensive bony erosion of the right mastoid (black arrow) and abscess formation at the soft tissue adjacent to the mastoid (white arrow).
Intra-operatively, the mastoid cortex was noted to be breached with unhealthy tissue overlying it. There was extensive soft tissue filling
up the entire mastoid cavity, antrum, middle ear, and external ear canal. The proximal part of the vertical portion of the facial nerve was
exposed by the polypoidal tissue, and the nerve was found to be edematous. The polypoidal tissue was sent for histopathological examination.
She completed 2 weeks of intravenous Ceftriaxone and 1 week of intravenous Dexamethasone. The postauricular wound did not heal well and
there was new granulation tissue observed at the inferior edge of the wound. The polypoidal tissue in the ear canal also persisted despite 2
weeks of IV antibiotic. The histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of embryonal RMS. Immunohistochemistry staining was
positive for desmin and vimentin. This explained the poor response of the disease to antibiotics. She was referred to pediatric oncology and
chemotherapy was started. She recovered well and is currently in remission with normal hearing and normal facial nerve function. RMS is a
family of soft tissue tumors which is associated with skeletal muscle lineage, and it usually occurs in the pediatric population. It is the
most common sarcoma in the head and neck region, accounting for 40% of all sarcomas in this region. Its site includes the orbit, oral
cavity, nasopharynx, infratemporal fossa, rarely middle ear cavity, and mastoid. The average age of presentation and diagnosis is at 4
years. The age of patients ranged between 1 and 8.6 years in a cohort of 14 patients. In the present case, the patient was merely 15 months
old, i.e., a toddler. The presenting complaints of RMS often mimic COM. The patients usually present with chronic aural discharge, hearing
loss with aural polyp. An early diagnosis is always a challenge because of the clinical features simulating COM. In this case, the patient
presented with AOM complicated with facial nerve palsy and mastoid abscess. These were rare and unusual presentations. The clinical features
seen in the present case was similar to a past research report which described symptoms such as bloody discharge, facial palsy, and
lymphadenopathy. Retroauricular mass, aural polyp, ipsilateral facial nerve palsy (tympanic facial nerve canal invasion), and cranial nerves
V, VII, IX, XI, and XII palsies (intracerebral extension) are common features in extensive RMS. In 2012, Vegari et al. reported a 3-year-old
child with serosanguineous purulent ear discharge with aural mass for 3 weeks and biopsy revealed embryonal RMS. This showed that young
children who presented with AOM and aural polyp must always be investigated carefully for malignancy, especially RMS. A repeat biopsy might
be needed if the initial histological result shows benign lesion as in this case. There are many other causes of aural polyp including
inflammatory polyps, cholesteatoma, chronic nonspecific inflammation, abscess, and squamous cell carcinoma, with malignancies involving two
out of fifty cases. Nevertheless, diagnosis of RMS relies on pathological evaluation. Therefore, repetitive biopsy is crucial to reach
diagnosis, especially in children with recurrent aural polyp who do not respond to treatment. Four histological subtypes have been reported,
most common being embryonal, which is also the subtype in this patient; followed by alveolar, others are pleomorphic and botryoid. RMS has a
poor prognosis and in the earliest series reported in 1966, no case of survival was reported. The longest survival time was 22 months
following presentation. Multimodal treatment includes multidrug chemotherapy with radiotherapy and/or surgery (international society of
pediatric oncology protocols) and it leads to significant improvement regarding remission rates. Five-year survival rate was reported to
vary between 41% and 81%. Long-term follow-up is required to exclude recurrence and to recognize and treat all complications. In conclusion,
RMS is a rare tumor and it is associated with high mortality rate in the pediatric group, if diagnosed late. A high index of suspicion is
needed to arrive at an early diagnosis. The present case illustrated a young patient with AOM, mastoid abscess, facial palsy, and aural
polyp who required repetitive biopsies for the diagnosis of RMS. We opine that early diagnosis and multimodal treatment might be essential
for a favorable outcome. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest. Edited by: Peng Lyu
