Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) in patients with HIV infection can, in rare cases, present with pulmonary nodules that histologically
involve granulomatous inflammation. This report describes an intriguing case of granulomatous PJP with pulmonary nodules after commencing
antiretroviral therapy (ART) in an HIV-infected patient without respiratory signs or symptoms. Diagnosis of granulomatous PJP was only
achieved through thoracoscopic lung biopsy. This case suggests that granulomatous PJP should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
pulmonary nodules in HIV-infected patients for unmasking immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome manifestation after initiation of ART.
Pneumocystis jirovecii (P. jirovecii) pneumonia (PJP) is a major opportunistic infection in immunocompromised patients and should be
considered as a possible diagnosis in patients with HIV infection who have respiratory symptoms with abnormal chest radiograph findings.
Generally, patients with PJP infections have radiological findings of diffuse bilateral ground-glass opacity with or without consolidation
and are diagnosed on the basis of visualization of pneumocystis organisms in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid. Granulomatous PJP is an
unusual histopathologic finding that only occurs in 4–5% of patients with or without HIV infection.12 A previous study suggested that the
development of granulomatous PJP may be associated with the host immune response rather than microbiological factors, such as P. jirovecii
genotypes.3 However, there are few case reports of granulomatous PJP in HIV-infected patients undergoing immunologic recovery following
antiretroviral therapy (ART). Here we report a unique case of granulomatous PJP infection that presented as multiple pulmonary nodules and
was barely diagnosed via thoracoscopic lung biopsy in an HIV-infected patient after initiation of ART and prophylaxis. A 47-year-old male
with HIV infection attended the outpatient clinic with a seven-day history of dry cough. The patient had a history of treated esophageal
varices due to alcoholic liver cirrhosis 3 months prior, when he was incidentally discovered to be infected with HIV. One month prior to
this report, he was started on ART [lamivudine 150 mg twice daily (b.d.), zidovudine 300 mg b.d., lopinavir/ritonavir 400/100 mg b.d.] and
prophylactic therapy for P. jirovecii infection [one trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) single strength tablet once daily (q.d.)]. The
physical chest examination was initially unremarkable, and a chest X-ray was normal (Fig. 1A). At baseline, before the initiation of ART, a
complete blood count showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 4110/µL, thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 80×103 cells/µL, and a
hemoglobin (Hb) concentration of 10.0 g/dL. The patient's CD4+ lymphocyte count was 75 cells/µL, and the HIV RNA titer was 350000 IU/mL. The
patient underwent repeat chest radiography 3 weeks after the initiation of ART. Newly developed multiple nodular lesions were observed on
the right lower lung field (Fig. 1B). Multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules were also visible on a computed tomography scan (Fig. 1C). These
findings would suggest tuberculosis or a non-infectious pulmonary infiltration, such as lymphoma or Kaposi's sarcoma. The patient's body
temperature was normal, and oxygen saturation with pulse oximetry was 99% on room air. A complete blood count showed a WBC count of 3460
cells/µL, an Hb concentration of 12.3 g/dL, and a platelet count of 113×103 cells/µL with 82% neutrophils. A chemistry analysis demonstrated
an elevated C-reactive protein concentration of 1.56 mg/dL. Bronchoscopy with BAL was conducted. No pneumocystis organisms were identified
via a Gomori methenamine silver (GMS) stain. The results of a bacterial culture and acid-fast bacillus (AFB) smear were also negative. A
wedge resection of the right lower lobe of the lung performed through video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery revealed chronic granulomatous
inflammation without necrosis, which could mimic the appearance of tuberculosis (Fig. 2A). However, no mycobacterial organisms were found
via AFB staining. Furthermore, a mycobacterial culture of lung tissue was negative after 6 weeks. Several clusters of P. jirovecii within
the granulomatous inflammation were identified using a GMS stain (Fig. 2B). The patient was treated successfully with TMP-SMX (four single
strength tablets three times daily) over a 21-day course. The patient continued receiving ART and secondary prophylaxis of P. jirovecii and
did not develop any further opportunistic infections during follow-up. This report presents the case of an HIV-infected patient with
granulomatous PJP unmasked as an immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) manifestation shortly after initiation of ART and
prophylactic therapy against PJP. The radiological and histological findings of this case were distinct from common manifestations in
patients with PJP. The chest radiograph revealed multiple nodular lesions, and P. jirovecii was not identified in BAL fluids. Granulomatous
PJP was only detected during thoracoscopic lung biopsy. BAL is considered to be highly sensitive as a diagnostic procedure of PJP (>90%).4
However, the procedure is known to have a low diagnostic yield in cases of granulomatous PJP. Therefore, open lung biopsies have the
possibility of improving diagnostic sensitivity.2 Granulomatous PJP is principally noted in HIV-infected patients and infrequently in other
immunocompromised patients who are undergoing immunologic recovery. Therefore, it has been suggested that host predisposition may be
implicated in the development of granulomatous inflammation against P. jirovecii. HIV-infected patients undergo immunologic recovery through
memory T cell redistribution following ART for up to 6 months.5 This case is similar to previously reported cases of granulomatous PJP in
HIV-infected patients following ART (Table 1).6789101112 In the era of highly active ART, there have only been three case reports of
granulomatous PJP as presentation of IRIS during the course of therapy. Risk factors for granulomatous PJP in HIV-infected patients
described in previous reports include the use of nebulized pentamidine for PJP prophylaxis, as well as IRIS. Previously reported cases were
all characterized by low baseline CD4+ cell counts and high HIV viral loads before the initiation of highly active ART. These features have
also been identified as risk factors for the development of IRIS. Pneumocystis-IRIS is known to be an unusual form of IRIS, generally
occurring 1 week to 1 month after the initiation of highly active ART.1314 Thus, granulomatous PJP as an unmasking or paradoxical form of
IRIS should be considered in HIV-infected patients receiving highly active ART who have a high risk for IRIS. The difference between our
case and previously reported cases is that this patient was prescribed TMP-SMX (one single strength tablet q.d.) for PJP prophylaxis. The
patient recounted that medication adherence was >90%. TMP-SMX in the prophylaxis of PJP is the drug of choice, with an efficacy of >90%.15
Non-adherence rather than drug failure may contribute to the development of breakthrough PJP in HIVinfected patients prescribed TMP-SMX.16
Thus, we assume that immune reconstitution in a high pneumocystis antigen burden setting may lead to the progression of clinically apparent
PJP in a patient with subclinical P. jirovecii infection. This case suggests that a diagnosis of granulomatous PJP should be considered in
HIV-infected patients with newly developed pulmonary nodules in order to unmask IRIS manifestation after the initiation of ART. The authors
have no financial conflicts of interest. Ref, references; 3TC, lamivudine; ART, antiretroviral therapy; AZT, zidovudine; BAL,
bronchoalveolar lavage; CMV, cytomegalovirus; d4T, stavudine; HAART, highly active ART; LPV, lopinavir; NA, not available; NM, not
mentioned; NFV, nelfinavir; PJP, Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia; TMP, trimethoprim; SMX, sulfamethoxazole.
