Limb-shaking transient ischemic attack (TIA) is a well-recognized, but rare observation in contralateral carotid steno-occlusive disease.
Consequently, most clinicians have not had the chance to witness an attack. We present the story of a 64-year old gentleman with exercise-
induced weakness associated with tremor in his right arm. His left internal carotid artery was occluded at the bifurcation. Administration
of statin and antiplatelet did not relieve his symptoms, and his stereotypic, exercise-induced “limb-shaking” episodes persisted. He
underwent successful extracranial to intracranial (EC-IC) bypass, which stopped his symptoms. The patient, however, returned to our
department and reported that he was able to recreate his original symptoms by compressing the bypass graft manually. To our knowledge, this
is the first case with video documentation of the clinical appearance of a limb-shaking TIA. We hope this case report will increase the
physicians’ understanding of the clinical nature of limb-shaking TIAs. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12883-016-0601-8)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Limb-shaking transient ischemic attack (TIA) is a well recognized,
but rarely documented sequelae of contralateral carotid occlusion or severe stenosis [1, 2]. We report on limb-shaking TIAs in a patient
with extracranial ipsilateral carotid occlusion alleviated by surgical revascularization (EC-IC bypass), which were later reproduced by the
patient intentionally compressing his bypass graft. Video documentation demonstrating the ischemia induced movement disorder is available
online (see Additional file 1). A 64-year old man with known arterial hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, a 40 pack-year history of smoking
and alcohol abuse, developed recurrent exercise-induced weakness associated with high-frequency irregular tremor in his right arm. In the
beginning, the patient only experienced the symptoms during running/brisk walking. The patient later progressed to experience the symptoms
during light walking. These shaking spells lasted for several minutes, but without other associated neurological deficits. MRI of the brain
revealed no signs of acute ischemia in the left hemisphere, but bilateral subcortical white matter lesions, suggestive of small vessel
disease, were present (Fig. 1). The left internal carotid artery (ICA) was occluded at the bifurcation (Fig. 2), but there were no
additional stenoses or occlusions in the remainder of the cervico-cranial vasculature. The left middle cerebral artery (MCA) was reperfused
from the circle of Willis due to anterior cross filling. On first admission, he was on no antihypertensive medication and had a blood
pressure of 135/91 and a heart rate of 91.Fig. 1Initial MRI FLAIR sequence. MRI FLAIR sequence showing several bilateral areas of discreet
cerebral ischemia. The diffusion weighted images were negative, suggesting an absence of acute cerebral infarction related to the continued
limb-shaking TIAsFig. 2Initial CT-angiography showing left carotid occlusion. CT-angiography of the left carotid artery demonstrates
calcified plaque of the left carotid bulb with atherosclerotic occlusion of the internal carotid artery (a). Of note the left external
carotid artery is patent and there is robust filling of its branches (b) Initial MRI FLAIR sequence. MRI FLAIR sequence showing several
bilateral areas of discreet cerebral ischemia. The diffusion weighted images were negative, suggesting an absence of acute cerebral
infarction related to the continued limb-shaking TIAs Initial CT-angiography showing left carotid occlusion. CT-angiography of the left
carotid artery demonstrates calcified plaque of the left carotid bulb with atherosclerotic occlusion of the internal carotid artery (a). Of
note the left external carotid artery is patent and there is robust filling of its branches (b) Administration of a statin and antiplatelet
therapy did not ameliorate his symptoms, and he continued to have stereotyped ’limb-shaking’ TIAs precipitated by mild exertion. He
underwent successful high-flow bypass between his superficial temporal artery and middle cerebral artery - extracranial to intracranial (EC-
IC) bypass, with prompt cessation of the spontaneous ’limb-shaking’ TIA episodes (Fig. 3). Duplex Transcranial Doppler confirmed the patency
of the bypass graft as demonstrated by reversal of flow direction in the left MCA (Fig. 4).Fig. 3CT-angiography demonstrating the patency of
the by-pass graft. CT-angiography after EC-IC bypass shows left craniotomy defect with pronounced distal MCA flow from the left superior
temporal artery (arrow)Fig. 4Transcranial doppler flow patterns. Sequential transcranial doppler (TCD) flow patterns are displayed. The left
MCA is imaged via temporal bone window at a depth of approximately 5 cm. Panel a shows anterograde flow through the left MCA with the
patient manually occluding the bypass graft (flow pattern above the line). The significance of the wave form is uncertain. Panel b display
the retrograde flow pattern in the left MCA delivered through a patent EC-IC bypass graft (flow pattern below the line). In panel c is TCD
done over the contralateral MCA showing a normal flow pattern CT-angiography demonstrating the patency of the by-pass graft. CT-angiography
after EC-IC bypass shows left craniotomy defect with pronounced distal MCA flow from the left superior temporal artery (arrow) Transcranial
doppler flow patterns. Sequential transcranial doppler (TCD) flow patterns are displayed. The left MCA is imaged via temporal bone window at
a depth of approximately 5 cm. Panel a shows anterograde flow through the left MCA with the patient manually occluding the bypass graft
(flow pattern above the line). The significance of the wave form is uncertain. Panel b display the retrograde flow pattern in the left MCA
delivered through a patent EC-IC bypass graft (flow pattern below the line). In panel c is TCD done over the contralateral MCA showing a
normal flow pattern The patient was asymptomatic for a little over two years, but returned as an outpatient reporting that he could manually
recreate his original symptoms by compressing the superficial temporal artery anastomosis (STA) just above the burrhole over the zygomatic
bone. On examination, ‘limb-shaking’ could be provoked 20 s after compression and lasting for 20 s after releasing the pressure (see
Additional file 1). The patient had electroencephalography (EEG) recording during an event, which was negative for epileptic discharges and
focal slowing. Historically, most TIAs have been attributed to cerebral embolism from small emboli with early recanalization . There are,
however, two types of TIAs. One of these are clearly caused by episodic hypoperfusion; limb-shaking TIAs [4, 5] and light-induced monocular
vision loss . These TIA syndromes are both associated with occlusion or severe stenosis of the carotid artery . Limb-shaking TIAs generally
occur in patients with carotid occlusive disease and exhausted cerebrovascular reserve . A symptomatic event may be precipitated by
decreased cerebral perfusion pressure, which can result from antihypertensive medications or orthostatic hypotension . It has also been
described as a consequence of decreased cerebral perfusion resulting from shifts of blood flow within vascular beds, such as those induced
by exercise [7, 9] or by the postprandial state . Hyperventilation, which causes blood flow shifts intracranially, has been reported to
cause limb-shaking TIAs in patients with Moya-Moya disease . In our reported case, mild exercise induced the symptoms, presumably from
increased skeletal muscle perfusion at the expense of cerebral perfusion. Treatment of repetitive limb-shaking TIAs with standard
preventative measures including platelet inhibition and statins was not effective in our patient or in cases reported in the literature .
Although no convincing evidence exists on the topic, successful surgical reperfusion in patients with repetitive limb-shaking TIAs, either
with carotid endarterectomy or EC-IC bypass [2, 12], has been reported to successfully alleviate symptoms in the majority of the reported
cases, as it did in this case. The Carotid Occlusion Surgery Study (COSS) compared medical stroke preventive therapy to EC-IC bypass
grafting in patients with carotid occlusion based on both clinical and imaging criteria (increased oxygen extraction fraction). However, the
study was halted due to futility. Although there was evidence of improved oxygen metabolism with EC-IC bypass, the surgical treatment
provided no protection from stroke over medical therapy. This was mainly due to a high perioperative risk. In our reported case, medical
therapy failed to stop symptoms, but surgical therapy was successful. The amelioration of distressing TIA symptoms was certainly interpreted
as a success of the surgical procedure, but does not prove a stroke was prevented in our case. It has been suggested that the surgery
actually decreased the effectiveness of the ‘pre-surgical collateral’ flow to the left MCA in this patient. Prior to the surgery, limb-
shaking TIAs occurred only with exercise, but not at rest. Two years following the surgery, during which time the collateral flow reserve
was not essential, the patient was able to reproduce the TIA symptoms at rest by manually compressing the graft. This suggests that the
effectiveness of the pre-existing collaterals decreased with establishment of the STA-MCA bypass impairing the recruitment blood flow
through collaterals, when the by-pass grafts blood flow was disrupted by brief mechanical compression. This reduction of collateral flow is
a theoretical risk of late complications of EC-IC bypass in the setting of traumatic disruption of the bypass graft. This case also
reinforces the concept that a movement disorder can be a manifestation of cerebral ischemia. The concept that “positive” symptoms are
seizure and “negative” symptoms are stroke is a generalization that can result in diagnostic errors with both stroke and seizure patients
[14, 15]. Hemiballismus and hemichorea are consequences of prior cerebral ischemia, which may become less frequent or entirely resolved over
time . Limb-shaking TIAs can be mistaken for seizures, if not carefully evaluated . Importantly, in the reported patient, a separate episode
was not accompanied by EEG changes (data not shown). From the video of the patient’s episode, the onset from vascular compression to
occlusion was approximately 20 s, and there was a further 20 s delay from reperfusion to the recovery from the symptoms. This observation is
consistent with early experimental studies of cerebral ischemia . Although the patient’s induced ischemic episodes have been short, and his
episodes prior to his revascularization surgery did not produce permanent symptoms, the patient has been advised against compressing his
STA. A patient population of 313 patients with symptomatic occlusion of the internal carotid artery was found to have 11 % (34 patients)
incidence of limb-shaking TIAs . This suggests this particular TIA type may be more common than generally realized. TIAs are almost never
seen by a physician, leaving the diagnosis to be made by history. To our knowledge, this is the first case with video documentation of the
clinical appearance of a limb-shaking TIA, which should increase physician understanding of the clinical nature of limb-shaking TIAs. Limb-
shakes are potential manifestations of acute stroke, but can easily be misdiagnosed as seizure activity. In addition, data does not support
seizure activity as the pathophysiological background behind this phenomenon. Physicians need to keep this in mind when evaluating acute
neurological patients. Additional file 1: Video presentation of patient with Limb-shakin TIA. (M4V 16499 kb) Video presentation of patient
with Limb-shakin TIA. (M4V 16499 kb) carotid occlusion surgery study extracranial to intracranial bypass electroencephalography internal
carotid artery middle cerebral artery superficial temporal artery anastomosis transient ischemic attack None. No funding was obtained for
this case report. All data and material (Additional file 1: Video) supporting our findings is contained within the manuscript. SR and DWK
collected the clinic information and interpreted the data. CO assisted in collecting the clinical information and data-modification. NF
interpreted the data and drafted the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying
images and video material. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. According to Danish
regulations no ethics approval was required for this case report.
