Pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest is associated with poor outcomes and the identification of potentially reversible reasons for
cardiac arrest is fundamental. We describe the case of a 46-year-old male with the rare coincidental finding of supravalvular aortic
stenosis and coronary vasospasm leading to recurrent pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest. Extracorporeal life support was
successfully applied for hemodynamic stabilization. Supravalvular aorticstenosis underwent surgical repair. The patient survived five time
resuscitation and was discharged after full neurological recovery. Coronary vasospasm and supravalvular aortic stenosis are rare but
potentially reversible causes of pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest. Extracorporeal life support allows accurate diagnostic and
possibly therapy even of uncommon reasons for cardiac arrest. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12872-016-0284-5) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Cardiac arrest due to pulseless electrical activity (PEA) is associated with
poor survival and neurological outcome when compared to a shockable rhythm [1, 2]. To provide successful resuscitation it is fundamental to
identify potentially reversible causes for cardiac arrest. The reasons for PEA are considered to be more often non-cardiac including
hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia, bleeding or hypovolemia, pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax and cardiac tamponade . This is reflected by current
treatment guidelines that recommend the use of laboratory testing or ultrasound during resuscitation . However, cardiac disease needs to be
considered as an alternative cause of refractory PEA. Extracorporeal cardiac life support is more and more commonly available and can be
applied to allow diagnostic and treatment of potentially reversible causes . These include also uncommon findings that might be missed by
routine measures during resuscitation. We describe here for the first time the case of a patient with the rare coincident finding of
coronary vasospasm and supravalvular aortic stenosis leading to recurrent pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrests. A 46-year-old male
was successfully resuscitated for out-of-hospital cardiac arrest due to ventricular fibrillation (Fig. 1). Coronary angiography immediately
after admission to the county hospital revealed coronary vasospasm but no coronary artery disease (Fig. 2a). After intracoronary
administration of glycerol trinitrate the coronary system exhibited regular flow without any relevant stenosis (Fig. 2b). Pulmonary
embolism, aortic dissection and other potentially reversible causes were ruled out by computer-assisted tomography (CT) of the chest and
lab-testing. Mild therapeutic hypothermia was established for 24 h. For aspiration pneumonia he was treated with ampicillin and
sulbactam.Fig. 1Time course. Schematic representation of relevant events. For cardiac arrests initial heart rhythm and time to return of
spontaneous circulation are given. vv-ECMO, veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; vva-ECMO, veno-veno-arterial extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation; PEA, pulseless electrical activity; VF, ventricular fibrillation; ROSC, return of spontaneous circulationFig.
2Coronary vasospasm and supravalvular aortic stenosis leading to pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest. Coronary angiography of the
right coronary artery revealing coronary vasospasm (a) that was relieved by application of glycerol trinitrate (b). ECG recording showing
marked intraventricular block during pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest (c) and a restored QRS (d) after vasodilatory therapy. 3D
reconstruction of computer-assisted tomography (e) displaying the supravalvular aortic stenosis (black arrow) and double lumen ECMO cannula
(white arrow). Ao, Aorta; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium Time course. Schematic representation of relevant events. For cardiac arrests
initial heart rhythm and time to return of spontaneous circulation are given. vv-ECMO, veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; vva-
ECMO, veno-veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; PEA, pulseless electrical activity; VF, ventricular fibrillation; ROSC, return
of spontaneous circulation Coronary vasospasm and supravalvular aortic stenosis leading to pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest.
Coronary angiography of the right coronary artery revealing coronary vasospasm (a) that was relieved by application of glycerol trinitrate
(b). ECG recording showing marked intraventricular block during pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest (c) and a restored QRS (d)
after vasodilatory therapy. 3D reconstruction of computer-assisted tomography (e) displaying the supravalvular aortic stenosis (black arrow)
and double lumen ECMO cannula (white arrow). Ao, Aorta; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium Because of the development of a severe acute
respiratory distress syndrome five days after admission our ECMO team established a veno-venous extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation
(vvECMO) system using a 31 Fr bi-caval cannula and transferred the patient to our center (Fig. 1). Another CT of the chest showed
progressive bi-pulmonary infiltration but no pulmonary embolism. Subsequently sufficient oxygenation was delivered by combined ECMO
treatment and lung protective ventilation. During his stay in the intensive care unit the patient underwent recurrent episodes of cardiac
arrest with pulseless electrical activity (PEA, Fig. 1, Fig. 2c) that were not associated with hypoxemia as he was on full ECMO support.
There was no evidence for other causes for PEA like tension pneumothorax or embolism in the bedside ultrasonography and echocardiography.
Disturbances in electrolytes could be ruled out be point-of-care testing. As we could not reach a return of spontaneous circulation after
15 min of resuscitation we successfully modified the established vvECMO to a veno-veno-arterial ECMO system by introduction of a 17 Fr
delivering cannula into the right femoral artery in order to provide extracorporeal life support (ECLS). This procedure could be performed
within 15 min without complications under ongoing CPR. During the following episode PEA was successfully terminated when coronary vasospasm
was relieved by i.v. administration of glycerol trinitrate and verapamil while circulation was maintained by ECLS (Fig. 1, Fig. 2d). In
total, the patient had experienced five episodes of resuscitation till then. A combined long-acting nitrate and calcium channel blocker
vasodilatory therapy was established and successfully prevented further events. ECMO therapy could be stopped 14 days after implantation,
weaning from mechanical ventilation was successful after 35 days. The patient has no family history of cardiac death. He underwent patch-
repair for supravalvular aortic stenosis during childhood. On day 6 transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography revealed a remaining
supravalvular aortic stenosis (Vmax 4 m/s, mean pressure gradient 37 mmHg) that was confirmed by CT (Fig.1e, Additional file 1: Video S1).
Older medical records showed, that the re-stenosis had been already detected during a rehabilitation exam 20 years ago but did not cause any
symptoms. Since hemodynamics remained stable after initiation of vasodilatory therapy surgical repair was postponed until respiratory
recovery. The stenosis was successfully relieved by supracoronary ascending aortic replacement on day 44 (Fig. 1). The patient had full
neurological recovery and was discharged to follow-up treatment. A cardiac defibrillator was implanted for secondary prevention of the
initial VF. We report a case of recurrent cardiac arrests due to coronary vasospasm and supravalvular aortic stenosis. The patient survived
five episodes of cardiac arrest, four of them with PEA which is an uncommon complication of vasospastic angina. Patients with vasospastic
angina pectoris are at higher risk of sudden cardiac death and most often cardiac arrest occurs due to tachycardic ventricular arrhythmia .
Nevertheless, as reported in this case, presentation might be different. There are only few previous reports of PEA associated with coronary
vasospasm , one of them describing recurrent cardiac arrests . The patient described in this case had a supravalvular aortic stenosis which
might have a) aggravated low cardiac output during coronary vasospasm and b) triggered coronary vasospasm due to elevated pressures in the
aortic bulbus. Supravalvular aortic stenosis is rare in general population but frequent in Williams-Beuren syndrome, a genetic disorder that
is associated with an increased rate of cardiovascular events and death . We did not find one of the known Williams-Beuren mutations or
other syndromic presentation in this patient. Veno-arterial ECMO is considered as the preferred method for extracorporeal life support to
allow further diagnosis and therapeutic measures when standard life support fails to achieve ROSC . Percutaneous cannulation can be
performed fast and with a low rate of complications in the intensive care unit or the cath lab by experienced teams . In this case veno-
veno-arterial ECMO was applied to treat concurrent ARDS and cardiac arrests. In conclusion, the coincidence of coronary vasospasm and
supravalvular aortic stenosis lead to recurrent pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest in this case. Unusual causes for refractory
cardiac arrest should be considered during and after resuscitation. Extracorporeal life support provides the opportunity for accurate
diagnostic and therapy when routine diagnostic measures are not sufficient. CT, computer-assisted tomography; ECLS, extracorporeal life
support; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; PEA, pulseless electrical activity; ROSC, return of spontaneous circulation. Additional
file 1: Animated 3D reconstruction of computer-assisted tomography displaying the supravalvular aortic stenosis and double lumen ECMO
cannula. (MP4 10783 kb) Animated 3D reconstruction of computer-assisted tomography displaying the supravalvular aortic stenosis and double
lumen ECMO cannula. (MP4 10783 kb) The article processing charge was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) and the University of
Freiburg in the funding programme Open Access Publishing. AL and TW created the concept, performed acquisition, analysis and interpretation
of data and wrote the manuscript. HHO provided image content. FB, HHO and CB were involved in drafting the manuscript and revising it
critically for important intellectual content. All authors gave final approval of the version to be published and agreed to be accountable
for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately
investigated and resolved. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report including clinical data and any accompanying images. No ethics approval was required in this case.
