Iridoschisis is a rare disorder characterized by splitting of the anterior and posterior iris stroma, resulting in disintegrated iris
fibrils which float freely in the anterior chamber. We report an exceptional case of bilateral iridoschisis occurring in conjunction with
keratoconus and severe allergic eye disease. A 24-year-old white man had had periocular contact dermatitis and allergic eye disease from the
age of 3 years. He was allergic to grass, animal hair, and pollen and worked grooming horses. He compulsively rubbed his eyes. There was no
history of previous blunt trauma to either eye. There were signs of bilateral iridoschisis and keratoconus with allergic conjunctivitis, all
of which were more severe in his right eye. An open drainage angle was identified bilaterally on gonioscopy, excluding primary angle
closure. There was no evidence of glaucoma in either eye. There are two previous cases reporting the combination of iridoschisis and
keratoconus, but no clear common etiology has been identified. In this case there was no evidence of angle closure but there were signs of
allergic conjunctivitis. This amalgamation of signs might be explained on the basis of habitual eye rubbing. Treating the allergic eye
disease has attenuated this behavior. Iridoschisis is a rare disorder characterized by localized cleavage of the anterior and posterior iris
stroma . The anterior leaf of the iris is atrophic and has disintegrated into fibrils, which float freely in the anterior chamber. A clear
pathogenesis of iridoschisis has not been identified, although partial or complete angle closure in association with reduced axial length
and shallow anterior chamber depth is commonly found [2, 3]. We report an exceptional case of bilateral iridoschisis, keratoconus, and
severe allergic eye disease in a patient with an open drainage angle and a deep anterior chamber in both eyes. This case suggests the
intriguing possibility that his ophthalmic pathology may be explained on the basis of habitual eye rubbing. A 24-year-old right-handed white
man presented with a 21-year history of compulsive eye rubbing secondary to periocular atopic dermatitis and allergic conjunctivitis. He was
allergic to animals, grass, and pollen and worked grooming horses. Topical emedastine 0.05 % drops, periocular 1 % hydrocortisone, and oral
antihistamines were used to control his symptoms. His general health was excellent. His corrected visual acuity was 6/7.4 right eye (OD;
–5.25/–6.50×30) and 6/9 left eye (OS; –2.00/–4.00×95) with irregular astigmatism. There was evidence of periocular dermatitis with mild
scaling and lichenification. Papillae were present on the upper tarsal conjunctivae, typical of allergic conjunctivitis. There were no other
ocular signs of atopic disease. His intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg for both eyes (OU). Bilateral, asymmetrical inferior iridoschisis was
present without corectopia or ectropion uveae (Fig. 1a, b). His anterior chamber was deep. Gonioscopy identified an open drainage angle
allowing the ciliary body to be visualized through 360 degrees OU (Fig. 1c). Scheimpflug imaging measured an anterior chamber depth of 3.48
mm OD and 3.45 mm OS. Corneal topography documented bilateral keratoconus (Fig. 1d, e). A posterior segment examination revealed a healthy
optic disc and macula.Fig. 1Anterior segment photograph of right (a) and left eyes (b) demonstrating asymmetrical inferior iridoschisis
worse on the right, maximal in the inferotemporal quadrant. Anterior iris stroma can be identified protruding into the deep anterior
chamber. Gonioscopy reveals an open drainage angle with a ciliary body band visible in the inferior drainage angle of the left eye (c). Note
the protrusion of the anterior iris stroma into the anterior chamber on gonioscopy. Oculus Pentacam corneal topography (anterior surface)
demonstrates bilateral keratoconus, worse on the right (d) than the left (e) with apical decentration. Central corneal thickness was 449
microns right eye and 429 microns left eye. OD right eye, OS left eye Anterior segment photograph of right (a) and left eyes (b)
demonstrating asymmetrical inferior iridoschisis worse on the right, maximal in the inferotemporal quadrant. Anterior iris stroma can be
identified protruding into the deep anterior chamber. Gonioscopy reveals an open drainage angle with a ciliary body band visible in the
inferior drainage angle of the left eye (c). Note the protrusion of the anterior iris stroma into the anterior chamber on gonioscopy. Oculus
Pentacam corneal topography (anterior surface) demonstrates bilateral keratoconus, worse on the right (d) than the left (e) with apical
decentration. Central corneal thickness was 449 microns right eye and 429 microns left eye. OD right eye, OS left eye There was no family
history of keratoconus or iridoschisis. There are only two previous cases reporting the rare combination of iridoschisis and keratoconus [4,
5]. The authors of these reports struggled to identify a unifying mechanism of keratoconus and iridoschisis, suggesting the unlikely
hypotheses of a potential genetic association or common embryological derivation of involved tissues. Eye rubbing was not commented on
specifically in such reports; it was not known to be strongly associated with keratoconus at the time. This report suggests, for the reasons
outlined below, that eye rubbing may represent the common origin of coexistent keratoconus and iridoschisis. Over the past 60 years since
the term iridoschisis was first proposed by Loewenstein and Foster , numerous case reports and several case series have attempted to
identify a common pathogenesis of iridoschisis from a variety of reported etiologies. Primary angle closure is strongly associated with
iridoschisis [1, 7–9], and may be associated with glaucoma in approximately two-thirds of patients. One series identified complete or
partial angle closure in 12 consecutive patients with iridoschisis leading to the conclusion that symptomatic or subclinical intraocular
pressure spikes were contributory to its development . The association of iridoschisis and plateau iris syndrome has recently been described
in a young patient . Gonioscopy and Scheimpflug imaging excluded primary angle closure in our patient. Trauma was considered a contributory
factor in the development of iridoschisis by Loewenstein 1948 and was supported by a subsequent report by Salmon . In a similar fashion to
primary angle closure, post-traumatic intraocular pressure peaks may result in shearing along dilator fibers with consequent splitting of
the iris stroma [9, 11]. Subluxation of the crystalline lens resulting in adjacent sectoral angle closure and iridoschisis has been reported
, with mechanical trauma from a mobile crystalline lens suggested to be contributing to its development. The possibility of intraocular
pressure peaks in the setting of lens subluxation due to a secondary angle closure mechanism suggests similarities in pathogenesis in
patients with primary angle closure. In summary, peaks in intraocular pressure in association with iris trauma are the most consistent
themes in previous reports of iridoschisis. Chronic eye rubbing combines these insults to the iris: mechanical trauma and intraocular
pressure spikes, which over years may conceivably have contributed to the development of iridoschisis in this case. Ocular manifestations of
atopic dermatitis include periocular dermatitis, atopic keratoconjunctivitis, atopic cataract, retinal detachment, and rarely, cicatricial
lid disease (symblepharon, entropion, and so on). Keratoconus is strongly associated with habitual eye rubbing. Multivariate analysis
identified eye rubbing as the only statistically significant risk factor for keratoconus, after adjustment for atopy, among all commonly
perceived risk factors . Our patient was right hand dominant and the keratoconus was more pronounced in his right eye, compared to the left.
A significant relationship between severe eye rubbing and keratoconus on the side of hand dominance has previously been demonstrated . In
conclusion, this patient had keratoconus, iridoschisis, and severe allergic eye disease. This amalgamation of signs, particularly obvious in
his right eye, might be explained on the basis of habitual eye rubbing. His behavior has been attenuated by treating the allergic eye
disease. Thanks to Dr Jon Brett at the Oxford Eye Hospital for taking the anterior segment photographs presented in this manuscript. Both
IHY and JFS have: 1) made substantial contributions to conception and design, or acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of
data; 2) have been involved in drafting the manuscript or revising it critically for important intellectual content; 3) have given final
approval of the version to be published; and 4) agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to
the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. The authors declare that they have no
competing interest. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
