It is extremely rare to see cerebrospinal fluid dissemination of intraventricular meningioma, particularly with the development of acute,
progressive brainstem/cerebellar dysfunction with an absence of mass formation in the corresponding anatomical sites. An 81-year-old man was
admitted because of double vision, right facial nerve palsy and truncal ataxia. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed normal findings
except for a tumor mass in the left lateral ventricle, which had been noted over 6 months previously. The patient developed hiccups,
hyperventilation, and drowsiness, which worsened progressively, and did not respond to corticosteroid or intraventricular immunoglobulin
therapy. Cerebrospinal fluid study revealed a mild elevation of protein, and cytology was negative. The patient died and an autopsy was
performed. Postmortem investigation disclosed a malignant transformation of benign fibroid meningioma with cerebrospinal fluid dissemination
of the malignant cells, diversely involving the surface of brainstem, cerebellum, and spinal cords, secondarily resulting in extensive
ischemia in the brain parenchyma by vessel occlusion. If a patient with an intraventricular tumor develops acute, progressive neurological
symptoms, the possibility that it is be caused by cerebrospinal fluid dissemination of tumor cells, after malignant transformation, should
be considered. Intraventricular meningioma is a rare neoplasm, representing only 0.5–3 % of all intracranial meningiomas . Moreover, it is
extremely rare to see a metastasis of meningioma cells (malignant meningioma), via cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) dissemination, involved in the
diverse central nervous system (CNS) structures, such as cerebellum, multiple cranial nerves, spinal nerve roots and the cauda equina .
Recently, we encountered a patient who developed acute progressive decline of brainstem function caused by the CSF dissemination of
intraventricular malignant meningioma. Here, we present the clinical and pathological data of the patient. An 81-year-old man was admitted
to our hospital following the appearance of diplopia and facial nerve palsy on the right side. He had noted a mild unsteadiness of gait for
3 months, which he assumed was due to advancing age. There were no extraordinary findings in his medical and familial history. The patient
was in good physical condition and without lymphadenopathy. On neurological examination, he had double vision, despite no obvious limitation
of extraocular muscles, peripheral facial nerve palsy on the right side, slurred speech, and truncal ataxia. He had no weakness or ataxia of
extremities, and his sensation was intact. He had a difficulty in micturition. He had no headache, papilloedema, and consciousness
disturbance indicating hydrocephalus. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed expansion of the fourth ventricle and a mass lesion in
the trigone of the left lateral ventricle, which was enhanced but with some distortion (Fig. 1a–c). This mass had been noted by chance over
6 months prior to admission when he had medical check-up of the brain and had not changed in size. Laboratory studies revealed that the
patients’ blood cell counts and chemistry were almost normal. Soluble interleukin 2-receptor (sIL2-R), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE),
antinuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), and tumor markers were all within normal limits. In addition, no anti-
ganglioside antibodies or anti-aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) antibodies were present. CSF examination revealed an elevated protein concentration
(125.5 mg/dl) and cell count (white blood cell 20 cells/μl; monocyte count, 16 cells/μl) with normal pressure (80 mmH2O), but cytology was
negative. Because the patient initially developed peripheral facial nerve palsy and a mild unsteadiness of gait, and neuroimaging and
laboratory findings were nonspecific or unremarkable, we suspected that he might have an immune-mediated disease such as brainstem
encephalitis. Thus, we initiated immunological treatments; these included intravenous methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day, 3 days) and
intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIg, 0.4 g/kg, 5 days). Despite these treatments, the brainstem symptoms progressively worsened; 1 week after
admission the patient developed persistent hiccups and hyperventilation, followed by lethargy. Fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)
at 17 days after admission revealed a slightly hyperintense lesion in the exit of the left trigeminal nerve and the left cerebellar
hemisphere (Fig. 1d, e). Diffusion-weighted image (DWI) of brain MRI revealed a hyperintense lesion in the left cerebellar hemisphere
(Fig. 1f). MRI of the cervical and lumbar spinal cord did not reveal any abnormalities (not shown). Although oral administration of
predonisolone (60 mg/day) was continued, the patient’s level of consciousness progressively deteriorated with ataxic respiration and
enhanced startle reflex. Simultaneously, his deep tendon reflexes were lost. CSF examination was performed repeatedly, showing mild
pleocytosis (white blood cell count 52 cells/μl; monocyte count 51 cells/μl), but the cytology results were negative. FLAIR MRI of the
brain, at 40 days after admission, revealed slightly diffuse hyperintense lesions in the left cerebellum and pons with an expansion of the
inferior horn of the lateral ventricles (Fig. 1g, h). However, no obvious mass lesions in the cerebral parenchyma or enlargement of the
tumor mass in the trigone of the left ventricle was demonstrated. DWI showed multiple infarctions in the left cerebellar hemisphere, pons,
occipital lobe, and bilateral corona radiata (Fig. 1i). Fifty-three days after admission, the patient died of respiratory failure, and an
autopsy was performed.Fig. 1Brain MRI of the present patient at admission (a –c), and 17 days (d–f) and 40 days (g–i) after admission. Fluid
attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images at admission showed no gross abnormality, including in the brainstem and cranial nerves (a, b),
although a mass-enhancing lesion was observed in the trigone of the left lateral ventricle on T1-weighted imaging (c). 17 days after
admission, FLAIR images revealed slight hyperintensity in the exit for the trigeminal nerve and the left cerebellar hemisphere (d, e), and
diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed hyperintensity in the left cerebellar hemisphere (f). At the final MRI at 40 days after admission,
diffuse high-intensity lesions and hydrocephalus were observed in the brainstem and cerebellum on FLAIR (g, h) and DWI revealed multiple
hyperintense lesions in the bilateral cerebellar hemispheres (i) Brain MRI of the present patient at admission (a –c), and 17 days (d–f) and
40 days (g–i) after admission. Fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images at admission showed no gross abnormality, including in the
brainstem and cranial nerves (a, b), although a mass-enhancing lesion was observed in the trigone of the left lateral ventricle on
T1-weighted imaging (c). 17 days after admission, FLAIR images revealed slight hyperintensity in the exit for the trigeminal nerve and the
left cerebellar hemisphere (d, e), and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed hyperintensity in the left cerebellar hemisphere (f). At the
final MRI at 40 days after admission, diffuse high-intensity lesions and hydrocephalus were observed in the brainstem and cerebellum on
FLAIR (g, h) and DWI revealed multiple hyperintense lesions in the bilateral cerebellar hemispheres (i) At post-mortem the major organs
showed no pathological changes. In the brain, the tumor in the lateral ventricle was solid and well-demarcated, but the surface of the tumor
partly collapsed (Fig. 2a). Histopathological analysis of the intraventricular tumor revealed aggregations of spindle cells including rich
collagen deposition and psammoma bodies in the central lesion (Fig. 2b). Additionally, dense cells with a malignant appearance (high
nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, prominent nucleoli, and multinuclear) and increased frequent mitoses were observed at the marginal part of the
tumor. The mitotic index was more than 20 mitoses per ten high-power fields on hematoxylin & eosin (HE) and Ki-67 immunostaining (Fig. 2j,
k). The cells in both benign and malignant parts were positive for vimentin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), partially positive for
S-100, but negative for cytokeratin, Schwann/2E, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and Olig2, suggesting that the tumor cells
originated from a meningioma (Fig. 2c-i, l-r). Thus, the pathological diagnosis of the intraventricular tumor was a mix of fibrous
meningioma (WHO grade I) and anaplastic meningioma (WHO grade III).Fig. 2 a: Macroscopic photograph of the intraventricular tumor. The main
part of the tumor was encapsulated and solid (white arrow). The bottom part of the tumor became prominent and soft (black arrow). b-i:
Histopathology of the main part shown with a white arrow in Fig. 2a. This region consisted of spindle-shaped fibrous cells, including a
large amount of collagen deposits (b, hematoxylin & eosin (HE) stain). Using immunochemistry, the cells positively stained for vimentin (c),
epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (d) and S-100 protein (e), but were negative for cytokeratin (f), Schwann 2/E (g), GFAP (h), Olig2 (i) and
lymphocytic markers (data not shown). These cellular profiles confirmed the histological diagnosis of the tumor as fibrous meningioma (WHO
grade I). j-r: Histopathology of the part shown with a black arrow in Fig. 2a. This region showed increased cellularity, and cells were
large, atypically shaped with multiple nuclei and prominent nucleoli (j). Mitotic cells were confirmed by examining more than 20 percent
high-power fields on HE (j) and Ki67 stain (k). The cells with a malignant appearance were also positive for vimentin (l), EMA (m), S-100
protein (n) and cytokeratin (o), but negative for Schwann 2/E (p), GFAP (q) and Olig2 (r); This part of the tumor was diagnosed as
anaplastic meningioma (WHO grade III) a: Macroscopic photograph of the intraventricular tumor. The main part of the tumor was encapsulated
and solid (white arrow). The bottom part of the tumor became prominent and soft (black arrow). b-i: Histopathology of the main part shown
with a white arrow in Fig. 2a. This region consisted of spindle-shaped fibrous cells, including a large amount of collagen deposits (b,
hematoxylin & eosin (HE) stain). Using immunochemistry, the cells positively stained for vimentin (c), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (d)
and S-100 protein (e), but were negative for cytokeratin (f), Schwann 2/E (g), GFAP (h), Olig2 (i) and lymphocytic markers (data not shown).
These cellular profiles confirmed the histological diagnosis of the tumor as fibrous meningioma (WHO grade I). j-r: Histopathology of the
part shown with a black arrow in Fig. 2a. This region showed increased cellularity, and cells were large, atypically shaped with multiple
nuclei and prominent nucleoli (j). Mitotic cells were confirmed by examining more than 20 percent high-power fields on HE (j) and Ki67 stain
(k). The cells with a malignant appearance were also positive for vimentin (l), EMA (m), S-100 protein (n) and cytokeratin (o), but negative
for Schwann 2/E (p), GFAP (q) and Olig2 (r); This part of the tumor was diagnosed as anaplastic meningioma (WHO grade III) The malignant
cells disseminated and invaded the parenchyma and small vessels of the brain – preferentially invading the surface regions of the midbrain,
pons and medulla oblongata. Invasion of small vessels resulted in ischemic damage around them. These ischemic changes, including the brain
malacia, were found in the cerebellar white matter, pons and lower part of cerebral parenchyma (Fig. 3a, c). Cranial nerves, such as the
facial nerve, trigeminal nerve, and oculomotor nerve, were packed with tumor cells (Fig. 3d). Furthermore, tumor cells were diffusely found
adhered to the thoracic to lumbar spinal cord and multiple nerve roots, as well as the cauda equina, which were similarly filled with tumor
cells (Fig. 3e-g). Because all the observed tumor cells shared the same immunohistochemical characteristics (Fig. 3h, i), it is possible
that the copious malignant cells originated from the anaplastic meningioma in the left ventricle of the present patient and disseminated
extensively through the CSF, resulting in progressive dysfunction of brainstem and cerebellum.Fig. 3 a-i: Histopathology of dissemination
and infiltration of tumor cells. Copious cells invaded the surface, parenchyma and vessels of the brainstem (a, b; medulla oblongata, c;
pontine base, d; pons and trigeminal nerve), spinal cord (e; dorsal part of T2) and nerve root (f; dorsal root of L2, g; cauda equina). The
cells invaded directly from the surface and damaged the tissue structures (a, d, f). Moreover, vascular infiltration of the cells caused
ischemic necrosis around the vessels (c). The cells, which invaded the brainstem, pontine, spinal cord and nerve root, also showed the
anaplastic meningioma with a highly increased mitotic ratio (b) and were positive for vimentin (h) and EMA (i) a-i: Histopathology of
dissemination and infiltration of tumor cells. Copious cells invaded the surface, parenchyma and vessels of the brainstem (a, b; medulla
oblongata, c; pontine base, d; pons and trigeminal nerve), spinal cord (e; dorsal part of T2) and nerve root (f; dorsal root of L2, g; cauda
equina). The cells invaded directly from the surface and damaged the tissue structures (a, d, f). Moreover, vascular infiltration of the
cells caused ischemic necrosis around the vessels (c). The cells, which invaded the brainstem, pontine, spinal cord and nerve root, also
showed the anaplastic meningioma with a highly increased mitotic ratio (b) and were positive for vimentin (h) and EMA (i) We also performed
molecular analysis for two regions of the tumor, the fibrous cell part and the malignant cell part. Our chromosome analysis revealed more
than 500 differences of gene expressions between two regions. Interestingly, only in the tumor from the malignant region, the deletion of
chromosome 9p21 was detected where the genes CDKN2A and CDKN2B were located (Fig. 4). It has been well known that the homozygous deletions
of CDKN2A/B are found in most anaplastic meninigomas and these genes have been studied for abnormalities in advanced meningioma . Then, we
considered that the malignant region was an anaplastic meningioma transformed from the benign cells, also in molecular aspect. Tumor samples
were collected from the autopsy of this patient. Written informed parental consents were obtained prior to sample collection. The study was
approved by the institutional review boards of Juntendo University. Genome DNA was extracted from Paraffin tissue blocks using GeneRead DNA
FFPE Kit (Cat. No.180134,QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). The DNA was amplified by REPLI-g FFPE Kit (Cat. No.150243), and was investigated for
genomic alteration using the Genome-Wide Human CytoScan HD Array (Affymetrix, CA, USA) according to the manufacture’s protocol. Scanned data
was analyzed with Chromosome Analysis Suire v2.1 ((Affymetrix, CA, USA). SNP oligonucleotide microarray analysis was perfoemed using
Affymetrix GnenChip Human Mapping 6.0 SNP array. Sample preparation, hybridization, and scanning were performed according to manufacture’s
specifications (Affymetrix, CA, USA). Analyses were performed using the Genotyping Console v2.0 (Affymetrix) and Ingenuity Pathway
Analysisv7.5 (Ingenuity Systems, CA, USA).Fig. 4The chromosome analysis for the two tumor parts. The deletion of chromosome 9p21 was
detected in the malignant region, the left side sample The chromosome analysis for the two tumor parts. The deletion of chromosome 9p21 was
detected in the malignant region, the left side sample Generally, neoplastic meningitis is not uncommon with solid carcinoma, e.g., breast
cancer, lung cancer, and gastrointestinal cancer ; however, it is extremely rare to see the CSF dissemination of intraventricular malignant
meningioma. To our knowledge, only eight such cases have been hitherto reported . In these cases, tumor mass of meningioma in the brain or
spinal cord was found transformed from low-grade meningioma to malignant meningioma, eventually resulting in the CSF dissemination of
malignant tumor cells. In the present patient, the solitary tumor in the lateral ventricle contained mixed pathology of benign and malignant
parts originated from the common cellular profile of the meningioma. Of note, unlike the previously reported cases, neuroimaging studies
could not demonstrate any tumor mass suggestive of metastasis in the present patient. This may be one reason for the delay in the clinical
diagnosis despite such widespread dissemination of tumor cells. CSF dissemination of malignant tumor cells may potentially cause a wide
variety of neurological symptoms, such as hydrocephalus, cerebellar dysfunction, disturbances of multiple spinal nerve roots or the cauda
equina, and cranial nerve palsy . Conversely, brainstem dysfunction by CSF dissemination of malignant cells is rare; only a few reports are
available in the literature in which Wallenberg syndrome or central hyperventilation was induced by CSF dissemination of malignant tumor
cells [8, 9]. In the present patient, although marked and progressive decline of brainstem function was observed, an accurate diagnosis
could not be made until the post-mortem examination, suggesting that it is by no means easy to make a prompt diagnosis of this type of
clinical condition. Clinically, peripheral facial nerve palsy, diplopia and unsteadiness of gait were the initial manifestations in the
present patient. These symptoms, if they occur acutely, risk misleading the differential diagnoses towards more frequent clinical
conditions, such as brainstem encephalitis or Fisher syndrome . Unfortunately, CSF cytology, which was performed repeatedly, did not
identify any malignant cells in the present patient. Although the specificity of CSF cytology is high, the sensitivity is low, between 45
and 95 % . Reportedly, in cases of leptomeningeal metastasis, malignant cells were identified in the CSF in 54 % of cases on initial lumber
puncture, and remained negative in 8 %, even after repeated examination . The reason for the low specificity of the CSF cytology in
leptomeningeal metastasis remains unclear regardless of extensive seeding of the malignant cells via the CSF. We speculate that the
malignant cells may have a propensity to adhere easily to the meninges rather than floating freely in the CSF. The pathology showed that the
malignant part of this tumor was positive for cytokeratin. Cytokeratin, a known marker of metastatic carcinoma, was expressed only in cells
of the malignant part. This finding did not rule out the diagnosis of meningioma because cytokeratin expression was also detected in 75 % of
malignant meningiomas . Although it is certainly not easy to make a precise diagnosis of this type of clinical condition, it is clinically
important to note that when seeing a patient with an intraventricular tumor in whom any neurological symptoms appeared progressively, the
possibility should be kept in mind that CSF dissemination of tumor cells, after malignant transformation, might be the potential cause, even
if CSF cytology is negative. CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CNS, central nervous system; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; sIL2-R, Soluble
interleukin 2-receptor; ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ANCA, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; AQP-4, anti-aquaporin-4; IVIg,
intravenous immunoglobulins; DWI, diffusion-weighted image; FLAIR, fluid attenuated recovery; HE, hematoxylin-eosin; EMA, epithelial
membrane antigen; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein We thank Dr. Kanako Ogura and Prof. Toshiharu Matsumoto, Department of Pathology at
Juntendo University Nerima Hospital, for the general pathological study. The dataset supporting the conclusions of this article is included
within the article. MF performed data acquisition, analyzes and interpreted the data, and drafted the manuscript. MT performed the
pathological analysis and revised the manuscript. AK performed molecular and genetic analysis. MK, KY, and YM performed data acquisition. NH
revised the manuscript. HM contributed to conception and design, data acquisition, data analysis and interpretation, and manuscript
revision. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed
consent for publication of this case report and any accompanying images was obtained from the patient’s family because he had passed away.
The authors declare that ethics approval was not required for this case report.
