Niemann–Pick disease type C is a rare metabolic disease characterized by progressive neurological deterioration with childhood onset, and
often results in premature mortality. Niemann–Pick disease type C has an extremely heterogeneous clinical presentation with a wide range of
visceral and neurological signs and symptoms that are not specific to the disease, and which progress over varied periods of time. The
incidence and epidemiology of Niemann–Pick disease type C in Russia have not been characterized. We report the case of a Russian newborn
with early-infantile onset Niemann–Pick disease type C who displayed prolonged neonatal jaundice and hepatosplenomegaly. A 5-year-old white
boy born to non-consanguineous Russian parents was originally diagnosed with galactosemia at the age of 2 months based on a raised blood
galactose level. A galactose-free and lactose-free diet resulted in achievement of a normal galactose level, but hepatosplenomegaly and
cholestatic signs persisted. Liver biopsy results hinted at possible Niemann–Pick disease type C, but differential diagnostic investigations
for progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 2 (Byler syndrome) indicated a heterozygous genotype suggestive of this disease.
Further, progressive neurological symptoms prompted additional genetic analyses for possible Niemann–Pick disease type C, from which an as-
yet unreported combination of known NPC1 gene mutations was identified, and a final diagnosis of Niemann–Pick disease type C was
established. The patient subsequently developed typical neurological symptoms of early-infantile Niemann–Pick disease type C, including
vertical supranuclear ophthalmoparesis and cerebellar ataxia. Miglustat therapy was initiated 2.5 years ago, and some improvements in
movement and speech have since been observed. This case illustrates the continued challenges associated with diagnosing Niemann–Pick disease
type C based on the appearance of nonspecific cholestatic symptoms. Based on this case we recommend examination of all newborns and children
who display unexplained cholestasis or isolated splenomegaly/hepatosplenomegaly during the first months of life for other signs of possible
Niemann–Pick disease type C. Niemann–Pick disease type C (NP-C) is a rare lysosomal storage disease in which impaired intracellular lipid
trafficking leads to excess storage of cholesterol, sphingomyelin, glycosphingolipids, and sphingosine in the brain, liver, spleen, lungs,
and other tissues . The incidence of NP-C in Russia has not yet been established; only single case reports have been published to date .Fig.
1Histopathological liver biopsy findings. Hematoxylin and eosin staining with magnification ×400 showing swollen Kupffer cells with foamy
cytoplasm, typical for Niemann–Pick disease type C Histopathological liver biopsy findings. Hematoxylin and eosin staining with
magnification ×400 showing swollen Kupffer cells with foamy cytoplasm, typical for Niemann–Pick disease type C NP-C has an extremely
heterogeneous clinical presentation characterized by a wide range of symptoms that are not specific to the disease, and which arise and
progress over varied periods of time [1, 3]. Disease onset occurs in the neonatal period in a notable proportion of patients. In particular,
NP-C represents one of the leading metabolic causes of cholestatic syndrome in babies . Non-immune hydrops, ascites, and fetal
hepatosplenomegaly are also often described in affected children . Cholestasis and severe splenomegaly in the absence of portal hypertension
are considered to be pathognomonic . We report the case of a 5-year-old boy with early infantile onset NP-C that illustrates some of the
challenges associated with diagnosing the disease early on in life based on the appearance of nonspecific cholestatic symptoms. The patient
was a 5-year-old Caucasian boy (weight at birth 2900 g, height at birth 50 cm) born to non-consanguineous parents with no previous medical
history of NP-C in Krasnodar, Russia. Jaundice was observed at the age of 3 days and was considered physiological. The child was therefore
discharged. However, he was later hospitalized at a child care facility due to continued jaundice and mild hepatosplenomegaly (liver 2.5 cm
and spleen 1 cm), at which point raised total and conjugated bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, cholesterol, alanine aminotransferase (ALT),
and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) were observed. The results of his hematology and urine analysis tests were normal, but heightened
nervous reflex irritability was observed. Blood polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus
(HSV), toxoplasmosis, and chlamydia infection were negative. However, a blood galactose of 12 ng/ml (upper limit of normal, 7.1 ng/ml) was
observed, which increased to 20 ng/ml at repeat examination. On this basis, galactosemia was suspected and a galactose-free and lactose-free
diet was prescribed. By the age of 2 months the patient’s blood galactose level was normalized, but cholestasis and hepatosplenomegaly
persisted. He was therefore referred to the Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology at the Federal State Budget
Institution in Moscow, Russia for further work up. We observed hypotrophy and continued jaundice at our initial examination: body weight
4100 g (percentile 5 to 10); height 57 cm (percentile 25). Ongoing hepatosplenomegaly, cholestasis, and cytolysis were also confirmed, but
synthetic liver function tests and standard metabolic parameters were all normal (Table 1). There were no signs of portal hypertension in
spite of the enlarged spleen (+6.5 cm under the costal rib). His plasma chitotriosidase was slightly increased (251.5 nmol/mg/hour, normal
range 4.5 to 198 nmol/mg/hour). Galactosemia was eventually ruled out based on normal galactose-1-phosphate-uridyl transferase enzyme levels
and genetic testing. Differential diagnoses for an extensive group of other metabolic and non-metabolic diseases were eliminated: biliary
atresia, Gaucher disease type 1 (GD1), α-1-antitrypsin deficiency, tyrosinemia, citrullinemia type 2, progressive familial intrahepatic
cholestasis type 3, mitochondrial disorders, Alagille syndrome, and others.Table 1Blood biochemical analysis at the age of 2 months and
1 weekParametersValueNormal rangeTotal bilirubin, mkM/l2233.4–21.0Conjugated bilirubin, mkM/l1170–5.5Gamma glutamine transferase,
U/l730–50Alkaline phosphatase, U/l73050–360Alanine aminotransferase, U/l3130–40Aspartate aminotransferase, U/l6730–40Creatine phosphokinase,
U/l1670–171Albumin, g/l4535–50Cholinesterase, U/l62373930–10800Fibrinogen, g/l3,92–4Prothrombin time index, %9480–120Lactate,
mmol/l1.11.2Glucose, mmol/l3.73.5–6.4 Blood biochemical analysis at the age of 2 months and 1 week A liver biopsy revealed swollen Kupffer
cells with foamy cytoplasm, which are considered typical histopathological hallmarks of NP-C (Fig. 1). A preliminary diagnosis of NP-C was
therefore concluded. No causal NPC2 gene mutations were detected; while parallel investigations for progressive familial intrahepatic
cholestasis type 2 (Byler syndrome) indicated a heterozygous genotype suggestive of this disease. Typical symptoms of Byler syndrome include
progressive cholestasis with low blood gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT) levels and severe pruritus. Liver transplantation is always indicated
for Byler syndrome because of its association with biliary cirrhosis and poor quality of life. During the examination of our patient at the
age of 2 to 3 months he had slightly increased (near-normal) GGT and he was too young for pruritus. Pruritus usually appears at the age of 4
to 5 months or later, which is why we could not exclude Byler syndrome. On the other hand we could not insist on the performance of genetic
testing for NPC1 in this case because of the expense involved and the fact that his family was not ready. The patient undertook a high
medium-chain triglyceride diet with fat-soluble vitamins, and ursodeoxycholic acid therapy. Jaundice eventually disappeared by 5 months of
age, and by the age of 2 years his hepatomegaly had resolved. His splenomegaly had also decreased (6 to 7 cm). Later on it became obvious
that he did not have Byler syndrome as his cholestasis resolved, he did not have pruritus, and he had splenomegaly without portal
hypertension. He was therefore not indicated for liver transplantation. On balance, we decided to suspend further genetic testing. After a
bout of acute otitis he stopped walking on his own aged 2 years and 10 months. He also stopped eating independently due to a pronounced
tremor. Brain MRI findings were normal. These neurological symptoms prompted further diagnostic tests for possible NP-C, and complete NPC1
gene mutation analysis identified an as yet unreported combination of known mutations c.2777C>T (p.Ala926Val: CM077214) and c.2196_2197insT.
Retrospective analysis of his neurological status showed normal psychomotor development during his first year of life, but he did display
minor deficits (for example, inward turning of his feet, awkward gait) that were probably the first neurological disease manifestations. An
observable tremor first appeared when he was 2.5-years old. At the time of reporting he is 5-years old and displays abnormal saccadic eye
movements, trunk ataxia, hypotonia, subcortical cerebellar dysarthria and dysmetria, and intention tremor. He continues to walk with
assistance but his gait is ataxic-polyneuropathic. He has also lost 2 kg in body weight since the initial onset of neurological
manifestations, and displays signs of first-degree hypotrophy. His splenomegaly persists (spleen size, 7 cm). Miglustat (Zavesca®; Actelion
Pharmaceuticals Ltd) was initiated 2.5 years ago with appropriate dietary alterations. Positive changes have since been observed, including
reduced tremor and decreased muscle hypotonia. The patient can sometimes walk without assistance and he exhibits a degree of improvement in
his speech. He has also gained weight. His liver function test results remain normal, and splenomegaly has persisted without signs of portal
hypertension. This case report is based on a typical case of early-infantile onset NP-C, and illustrates some of the challenges associated
with diagnosing patients with NP-C early on in life based on the appearance of nonspecific cholestatic symptoms. Despite the appearance of
neonatal cholestasis, which prompted investigations for possible Gaucher disease (GD) or galactosemia, neurological signs suggestive of NP-C
only became apparent at the end of the first year of life [1, 3]. Cholestasis and splenomegaly were the first clinical signs of NP-C in our
patient, and NP-C ranks highly among possible metabolic causes of neonatal cholestasis . Nevertheless, a differential diagnosis was
performed in a way that took into account an extensive group of other metabolic and non-metabolic diseases, including: GD, galactosemia,
α-1-antitrypsin deficiency, tyrosinemia, citrullinemia type 2, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3, mitochondrial
disorders, Alagille syndrome, and others. Swollen Kupffer cells with foamy cytoplasm in liver biopsy specimens was the first strong sign of
NP-C, but even these histopathological changes are not specific to the disease . Filipin staining in cultured skin fibroblasts is considered
a key diagnostic test for NP-C [1, 3], but it was not applied in our patient due to technical difficulties. Genetic testing has increasingly
been used in the detection of NP-C over the last decade, particularly among patients with nonspecific, albeit suggestive, clinical symptoms.
In this case, NPC1 mutation analysis was only applied after the appearance of neurological disorders, and it identified known mutations
allowing a full confirmation of the diagnosis. NP-C pathognomonic symptoms such as vertical supranuclear ophthalmoparesis, and cerebellar
signs such as ataxia, dysarthria, and dystonia, only became evident 2 years ago (when our patient was 3-years old). The comprehensive
characterization of the time of onset, nature, and severity of neurological signs is considered vital for diagnosing NP-C, but can be very
challenging in children below 2 years of age . A recently developed pediatric version of the NP-C suspicion index alongside plasma oxysterol
testing might help in this respect, in future cases . A targeted treatment for neurological deterioration that has been reported to slow
disease progression and improve patients’ quality of life is now available for NP-C . In view of this case, we consider it important to
examine all newborns and children who display unexplained cholestasis or isolated splenomegaly/hepatosplenomegaly during the first months of
life for signs of possible NP-C. Matthew Reilly PhD at InTouch Medical Ltd provided medical writing support, paid for by Actelion
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. As corresponding author, AVD coordinated the specialist clinical care of the patient, wrote the first draft of the
manuscript, and was involved at all writing stages of the manuscript content. SVM, EYuZ, ELT, and AAP all contributed to the clinical
assessments and reviewed and provided critical input to the manuscript content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. All procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the
responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and with the Declaration of Helsinki 1975, as revised in 2000.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parent for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
