Posterior reversible encephalopathy is a syndrome highly associated with hypertension and cytotoxic therapy. The syndrome typically presents
with headache, visual abnormality, seizures and characteristic vasogenic edema on magnetic resonance imaging. The entity warrants a prompt
diagnosis to avoid deteriorating consequences. In this report, we describe a 15-year-old Iranian boy who was diagnosed with mixed connective
tissue disease, and cyclophosphamide pulse therapy was administered. Three days after the second pulse of cyclophosphamide, when he was
receiving prednisolone and hydroxycholoroquine, our patient developed generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Magnetic resonance imaging findings
showed high signal intensities in the posterior areas of his brain. After 8 days, the brain magnetic resonance imaging abnormalities were
resolved following the control of his blood pressure and antiepileptic treatment. These observations have been indicative of posterior
reversible encephalopathy syndrome. Nevertheless, our patient developed uncontrollable respiratory distress and eventually died. To the best
of our knowledge, this case is the first report of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome in a patient with mixed connective tissue
disease. As the patient developed posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome 3 days after cyclophosphamide pulse therapy to reduce the
disease activity, it is hard to accurately determine whether posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome in this case is a complication of
cyclophosphamide or a condition that resulted from the mixed connective tissue disease flare-up. Posterior reversible encephalopathy
syndrome (PRES) is a life-threatening condition which can be characterized by symmetric involvement of posterior white matter on magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and neurological impairments such as seizures, altered mental status, headache, and visual disturbances [1, 2]. PRES
has been reported in different conditions such as hypertensive encephalopathy, eclampsia, thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura, and
rheumatologic disorders . The mainstay of management of PRES is timely diagnosis and discontinuation of causative agents that may prevent
subsequent abnormalities of the central nervous system. The extensive use of immunosuppressive therapy and the autoimmune nature of
rheumatologic diseases may make patients more vulnerable for developing PRES in the course of disease. Nevertheless, to the best of our
knowledge, PRES has not been reported as a complication of treatment or a manifestation of disease in patients with mixed connective tissue
disease (MCTD). In this report, we describe a 15-year-old Iranian boy with MCTD who presented with PRES 3 days after cyclophosphamide pulse
therapy when he was receiving a high dose of steroids. Our patient was treated with antihypertension and antiepileptic medications and a
repeat MRI scan showed no abnormality 8 days later. Our patient was a 15-year-old Iranian boy with a 2-year history of skin ulcer compatible
to pyoderma gangrenosum. From the onset of his skin problems, he had been receiving a low dose of steroids, which was increased to 1 mg/kg 2
months prior to admission. He was referred to our hospital following development of muscle weakness and severe dyspnea. History-taking
revealed a 1-year history of discoloration of his fingers in cold temperatures. A physical examination showed scleroderma-like signs of
acrosclerosis and a small mouth orifice with difficulty in opening. Blood tests showed a remarkable elevation of muscle enzymes (creatine
phosphokinase >3000, aldolase 39.4 and lactate dehydrogenase 1510) and electromyogram-nerve conduction (EMG-NCV) tests indicated chronic
moderate to severe myopathic process. We performed a muscle biopsy of his left deltoid muscle that revealed multiple necrotic fibers and
extensive inflammatory endomysial foci. The laboratory findings showed antinuclear antibodies (ANA) 1:2500 positive, anti-double-stranded
(ds) DNA 198 positive, anti-SM >200 positive, anti-SCL-70 >200 positive, anti-centromere >2 positive, anti-U1 RNP 178.4 positive, white
blood cells (WBC) (from 3500 to 6900 during the hospitalization), hemoglobin (Hb) 12.3, platelets (PLT) 128,000, and erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) 56 (normal range <30). His anticardiolipin, anti-beta 2 glycoprotein I and lupus anticoagulant antibodies were
negative and also his complement 3 (C3) and complement 4 (C4) levels were in normal range. Our patient fulfilled the Alarcon-Segovia
diagnostic criteria with positive serology and three of the five clinical criteria especially Raynaud’s phenomenon, acrosclerosis, and
myositis. Our patient also met the Kasukawa diagnostic criteria with one common symptom of Raynaud's, positive serology, and mixed findings
of leukopenia/thrombocytopenia, acrosclerosis, and muscle weakness. A chest X-ray showed diffuse pulmonary infiltration and a computed
tomography (CT) scan reported a bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP) reaction. Further tests also showed heart failure
(ejection fraction = 30%) and pulmonary arterial hypertension (pulmonary artery pressure = 75 mmHg). Pulmonary embolus was ruled out by CT
angiography. According to the criteria, our patient was diagnosed with mixed connective tissue disorder (MCTD), and 1 g intravenous
methylprednisolone was administered. Then our patient received 500 mg cyclophosphamide pulse therapy, and was discharged with prednisolone
70 mg daily and hydroxycholoroquine 200 mg daily. Our patient received the second pulse of 500 mg cyclophosphamide 2 weeks later. Three days
after the second cyclophosphamide pulse when he was receiving prednisolone 70 mg/day, he developed several generalized tonic-colonic
seizures. After admission to the intensive care unit, he developed another seizure that lasts 3 minutes. At this time, his blood pressure
was 170/130. Therefore, phenytoin and antihypertension drugs were prescribed. An MRI scan of our patient revealed high signal intensities on
T2-weighted images and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences in the subcortical white matter of the occipital, posterior
parietal, and posterior temporal lobes, and the cerebellum (Fig. 1). After 8 days, the brain MRI abnormalities had completely been resolved.
These observations have been indicative of PRES.Fig. 1Brain magnetic resonance imaging T2-weighted/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery scan
showing high signal intensities in a the subcortical white matter of occipital, posterior parietal, and posterior temporal lobes and b the
cerebellum. c, d Follow-up brain magnetic resonance imaging T2-weighted/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery scan 8 days after the first
imaging showed complete resolution Brain magnetic resonance imaging T2-weighted/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery scan showing high signal
intensities in a the subcortical white matter of occipital, posterior parietal, and posterior temporal lobes and b the cerebellum. c, d
Follow-up brain magnetic resonance imaging T2-weighted/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery scan 8 days after the first imaging showed
complete resolution From the first day of his second admission, our patient presented fever, cough and dyspnea and the laboratory tests
showed creatinine 2.35 mg/dL, urea 182 mg/dL, WBC 3500, and platelets 75,000. A chest X-ray revealed extensive pleural effusion. In a
peripheral blood smear, there was no evidence of thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura. The serial blood test showed a progressive increase in
his creatinine level and decrease in his platelet count. Therefore, we started rituximab 500 mg for 2 weeks to control the disease flare-up.
However, rituximab was not efficient and we started intravenous immunoglobulin (IV Ig) for 5 days. IV Ig did not improve our patient and we
had to initiate plasma exchange. However, his creatinine level increased and respiratory symptoms became worse. Dialysis prevented the
worsening of his condition and relieved our patient’s symptoms. The results from bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) showed infection to
cytomegalovirus (CMV), Gram-negative bacillus, and candida. Although our patient received broad-spectrum antibiotics and antifungal agents,
his respiratory manifestations were not improved and he was intubated. After 5 days of intubation, our patient developed heart arrest and,
following 45 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CRP), our patient died. Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome was first
introduced by Hinchey and his colleagues in a study of 15 patients . PRES can be diagnosed in a patient with reversible neurological
manifestations including headache, nausea/vomiting, visual abnormalities, consciousness impairment, seizure activity, and focal neurologic
signs, in conjunction with bilateral involvement of posterior brain areas on magnetic resonance imaging . The pathophysiology of PRES
remains elusive. However, it has been suggested that a compromised cerebrovascular autoregulation due to acute hypertension may play a
pivotal role. Accordingly, impaired cerebrovascular regulation may lead to arteriole leakage and cerebral vasogenic edema [1, 2]. Although
the co-occurrence of hypertension and PRES is remarkable, other possible mechanisms have also been reported to be important in PRES such as
disrupted cerebral autoregulatory mechanisms due to autonomic dysfunction , breakdown of blood-brain barrier following cytotoxic agents-
induced endothelial toxicity, autoimmunity, and sepsis . In addition, immunosuppressive agents such as methylprednisolone, dexamethasone,
cyclosporine and cyclophosphamide have been reported to be related to PRES . Our patient presented PRES 3 days after cyclophosphamide pulse
therapy when he was receiving a high dose of prednisolone in the setting of a MCTD flare-up. On the other hand, clinical signs showed that
our patient developed sepsis concomitant with PRES. Therefore, we could not accurately determine the main causative source of PRES among the
cyclophosphamide pulse therapy, prednisolone, sepsis, and the flare-up of the underlying disease. Our patient had a 2-year history of taking
steroids for his dermatological disorder that may decrease the importance of maintenance prednisolone as the cause of PRES. Most of the
reported cases of PRES are suggested to be due to cytotoxic or steroid therapy. In the present case, the diagnosis of PRES a few days
following the second pulse of cyclophosphamide may underscore its offensive effects and may suggest the cyclophosphamide pulse as a
potential cause. Nevertheless, several reports show presentation of PRES unattributable to therapy in patients with rheumatologic diseases,
which suggested it to be a condition resulting from underlying disease and even, in some cases, PRES was the first manifestation of the
disease . As in our case, PRES was concomitant with sepsis, therefore sepsis may play a role in this condition. From the standpoint of
pathogenesis, MCTD may be strongly suggestive as a cause of PRES. Various studies highlight that endothelial cell damage resulted from
different autoantibodies in MCTD . Along these lines, vasculopathy has been suggested to be a specific feature of MCTD that may lead to
pulmonary arterial hypertension, which is responsible for most of the deaths in the late stages of MCTD . In addition, the dysfunction of
the autonomic system has been shown in MCTD . Therefore, PRES may be a manifestation of MCTD in our case because our patient presented PRES
during the disease flare-up. To the best of our knowledge, a case of PRES in a patient with mixed connective tissue disease has not yet been
reported. The neurological manifestations of MCTD have been believed to be less frequent than findings of other systems. Although the main
neurological manifestations of MCTD are trigeminal neuropathy, headaches, and aseptic meningitis, this report suggests PRES as a
neurological condition which may occur during the course of MCTD . Although there is no difference between our patient and previously
reported cases in terms of PRES characteristics, further reports are needed for better understanding of PRES in MCTD. To the best of our
knowledge, this case is the first report of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome in a patient with mixed connective tissue disease.
As the patient developed PRES shortly after the cyclophosphamide pulse, during an MCTD flare-up, and concomitant with sepsis, it is hard to
determine the accurate cause of PRES in this case. Taken together, MCTD may be strongly suggestive as the cause of PRES for the extensive
endothelial dysfunction involved in its pathogenesis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s family for publication of
this case and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CT,
computed tomography; MCTD, mixed connective tissue disease; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PRES, posterior reversible encephalopathy
syndrome. The authors thank the family of the patient for their assistance in preparing the manuscript. RR, RR, and MZY prepared the
manuscript and collected all data and suitable references. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they
have no competing interests.
