Cardiac troponin-I assays have been validated in horses.’High-sensitivity’ cardiac troponin assays are now the standard in human cardiology.
Objective: Appropriately validate the’high-sensitivity’ cardiac Troponin-T (hscTnT) assay for clinical use in horses, establish reference
intervals, determine the biological variation, and demonstrate assay utility in selected clinical cases. Methods: Analytical validation of
the Roche hscTnT assay included within- and between-run precision, linear dose response, limit of quantitation (LoQ), stability, and
comparison with cTn-I (iSTAT). Reference intervals and biological variation were determined using adult, healthy, Non-Competition Horses
(N = 125) and Racing-Thoroughbreds (N = 178). HscTnT levels were measured in two horses with cardiac pathology. The hscTnT demonstrates
acceptable within-run (L1 = 6.5 ng/L, CV 14.9 %, L2 = 10.1 ng/L, CV 8.7 %, L3 = 15.3 ng/L, CV 5.4 %) and between-run precision
(L1 = 12.2 ng/L, CV 8.4 %, L2 = 57.0 ng/L, CV 8.4 %, L3 = 256.0 ng/L, CV 9.0 %). The assay was linear from 3 to 391 ng/L. The LoQ was
validated at 3 ng/L. Samples demonstrated insignificant decay over freeze-thaw cycle. Comparison with cTnI assay showed excellent
correlation (range: 8.0–3535.0 ng/L, R2 = 0.9996). Reference intervals: The upper 95th and 99th percentile of the hscTnT population
distribution were 6.8 and 16.2 ng/L in Non-Competition Horses, and 14.0 and 23.2 ng/L in Racing-Thoroughbreds. Between-breed, diurnal
effect, and between-day variation was below LoQ. Two clinical cases with presumed cardiac pathology had hscTnT levels of 220.9 ng/L and
5723.0 ng/L. This benchmark study is the first to comply with CLSI guidelines, thus further establishing the performance characteristics of
the hscTnT assay, and reference intervals in healthy horses. Two clinical cases demonstrated further the clinical utility of the assay. As
acknowledged in a recent joint consensus statement, subtle or occult cardiac abnormalities are often difficult to diagnose in horses .
Similarly, determining the impact of any cardiovascular abnormality on present or future performance, on rider or driver safety, and the
long-term effects on health and longevity can be problematic . Early detection of cardiac pathologies would provide the opportunity to
recognize occult disease and allow intervention prior to potentially more serious outcomes such as cumulative cardiac damage or sudden
death. One cardiac diagnostic tool that has been adopted for use in veterinary medicine is the troponin assay. Of the three troponin
subunits, only cardiac Troponin-T (cTnT) and cardiac Troponin-I (cTnI) have unique amino acid sequences expressed as cardiac muscle-specific
isoforms, and are encoded by different genes than the troponins expressed in skeletal muscle . Since 2000, after an extensive search for a
biomarker of myocardial damage with sufficient analytical sensitivity and specificity, troponin assays have been deemed the test of choice
for detection of acute myocardial injury (AMI) in humans . The assays have evolved through numerous generations, each of which has undergone
improvements in analytical performance. Troponin-I and T assays with total imprecision ≤ 10 % at the 99th percentile, and measurable normal
values below the 99th percentile in at least 50 % of healthy individuals are now classified as’high-sensitivity’ assays in humans . Older
generation (‘non-hs’) troponin assay use in veterinary medicine has been fairly widespread (reviewed by Rossi et. al.) , and recently two
reports use the hscTnT assay [6, 7]. There are problems however, associated with the clinical utility and application of the troponin assays
reported in the equine literature to date [6, 8–12]. These include: 1)- The general lack of appropriate analytical validation which can lead
to erroneous interpretation of results and subsequent designation of reference ranges and threshold cut-off points. 2)- The large number of
commercially available troponin assays that differ from one another in terms of antibody-epitope specificity and preclude direct comparison
of results from various studies. 3)- The use of older generation troponin assays that lack the sensitivity to detect occult or potentially
cumulative myocardial injury with the degree of certainty needed in veterinary sports medicine to explore the effects of subclinical
myocardial damage. With’high-sensitivity’ (5th generation) cardiac troponin assays now available, our aim was to validate a human
automated’high-sensitivity’ cardiac Troponin-T (hscTnT) Roche Diagnostics assay for use in horse plasma, and to establish hscTnT reference
intervals in adult, healthy, Non-Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds as presented in 2014 . This validation study of the Roche
hscTnT assay for use in horses provides additional valuable information by complying with the recommendations of the Clinical and Laboratory
Standards Institute (CLSI), the National Academy of Clinical Biochemistry (NACB), and American Society of Veterinary Clinical Pathology
(ASVCP) for the first time. Genetic homologyUtilizing NCBI protein BLAST, Homo sapiens cardiac Troponin-T amino acid residues of epitopes
recognized by capture MAb (M7) (125–131:DRIERR) and detection MAb (M11.7) (136–147:EQQRIRNEREKE) for the hscTnT assay were compared to Equus
caballus cardiac and skeletal Troponin-T (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Amino acid sequence alignment of human cardiac Troponin-T (Type 2) adult isoform
(cTnT) with horse (Equus caballus) cardiac Troponin-T (Type 2) and homology with equine fast and slow skeletal muscle TnT using NCBI protein
BLAST. Amino acid sequences include the epitope regions against which the Roche, Cobas-e601 capture (M7) and detection (M11.7) antibodies
are directed Analytical validation of ‘high-sensitivity’ cardiac Troponin-T assayRoche Diagnostics cardiac Troponin-T ‘high-sensitivity’
assay, Cobas-e601 AnalyzerHscTnT assay, a 5th generation electrochemiluminescence immunoassay, was used on the Cobas-e601 Analyzer for
analysis of equine plasma samples, complying with manufacturer’s instructions and CLS internal quality controls systems. The manufacturer
determined the analytical characteristics for this assay in accordance with the CLSI-EP17-A2 requirements. The analyzer was calibrated using
human cTnT standards supplied for use of the hscTnT assay kit with human plasma.Equine Troponin-T samplesPurified equine cardiac troponin
used in linearity and precision studies was obtained from harvested equine myocardium as previously described . Plasma samples were
collected from all live horses, by jugular venipuncture in 5 mL lithium-heparinized tubes. Specimens were centrifuged at 2000 x g for
10 min, separated, frozen within 90 min, and stored at−80 °C until batch analyzed. Degree of hemolysis in all samples was assessed using the
serum indices instrument application on the Roche Cobas-e601 platform2 and no specimen included in this study reached the hemolysis
threshold to be excluded.Tissue specificityHomogenates of cardiac and skeletal muscle harvested from a healthy horse were prepared as
previously described and subsequently diluted.3 Dilutions used were within the linear range of the hscTnT assay (cardiac: 100,000 fold,
skeletal muscle: 10,000 fold). The tissue reactivities, expressed in ng/L wet weight, were corrected for the dilution factor and are
presented as means ± SEM. Tissue Reactivity (ng/g of wet tissue) = x hscTnT(ng/L) x dilution factor ÷ weight of muscle sample(g) x dilution
of original homogenate muscle stock.Linear dose responseN = 10 dilutions were prepared from purified equine cardiac troponin stock by serial
1:2 dilution (from 1:100 to 1:0.2) using normal equine plasma (hscTnT 3.28 ng/L) as diluent. Triplicates of the resultant 11 samples (mean
hscTnT levels ranging from 8.0 to 3526.7 ng/L) were analyzed to detect linearity over the expected measurable range.Assay precisionWithin-
run precision was evaluated by assaying plasma samples from 3 horses containing 3 different previously determined (Roche Diagnostics hscTnT
assay) concentrations of hscTnT (L1 = 6.5 ng/L, L2 = 10.1 ng/L, L3 = 15.3 ng/L) 10 times in the same run. Between-run precision was
evaluated by assaying prepared quality control samples consisting of purified equine cardiac troponin diluted with equine plasma at 3 levels
(L1 = 12.2 ng/L, L2 = 56.9 ng/L, L3 = 254.0 ng/L) over 3 months and 10 different runs.Functional sensitivityThe limit of quantitation (LoQ),
defined as the lowest analyte concentration that can be reproducibly measured with a between-run CV ≤ 10 %, was determined using 5 serial
dilutions of a stock, diluted, purified equine cardiac troponin sample (hscTnT range 4-37 ng/L), and analysing each dilution 5 times in
1 day.Stability studyStability of samples was tested at−80 °C for a period of 24 months. Samples were measured at the start and end of the
testing period and the average difference between the measured values before and after storage was calculated. Criteria for significant
change: average difference of less than 2X the between-run standard deviation of the control level closest to the mean of samples
measured.Comparison studyEleven diluted, purified equine cardiac troponin samples of various increasing, known hscTnT levels (previously
determined using Roche Diagnostics assay), were run in duplicate on the iSTAT for equine cTnI analyte levels allowing for comparison of
hscTnT to older generation cTnI results. Reference intervals and biological variation of hscTnT levels in healthy horsesTwo subset
populations were included in the study and sampled by convenience (summer 2013): one group of Non-Competition Horses with varying levels of
routine physical activity and a second group of Racing-Thoroughbred geldings (Table 1). These populations provide reference intervals of
troponin levels for application of the assay in sports medicine and exercise physiology in addition to general application in clinical
cardiomyopathy cases. The study was approved by the UCVM-Veterinary Sciences Animal Care Committee and consent was obtained from the
animals’ owners.Table 1Comparison of ages, sexes, breeds and resting heparin plasma hscTnT concentrations in horsesNumber12517811Non-
Competition HorsesRacing- ThoroughbredsClinical Case IClinical Case IIMedian Age (Range)5 (2–24)9 (4–18)1114Sexes56 Mares,69 Geldings178
GeldingsGeldingMareBreed(s)TB, QH, Drafts, Arabians, WBTBTBQHResting hscTnTMean (±SD), ng/L3.6 (±2.1)5.4 (±3.8)221.0a 5723.0b hscTnT Median,
ng/L3.04.0c N/AN/AhscTnT Range, ng/L3.0–17.03.0–24.0N/AN/AhscTnT 95 % URL (90 % CI), ng/L6.79(6.0–12.0)14.0(10.0–18.0)N/AN/AhscTnT 99 % URL
(90 % CI), ng/L16.2(N/A)23.2(N/A)N/AN/AComparison of ages, sexes, breeds and resting heparin plasma hscTnT concentrations from 303
apparently healthy horses (Non-Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds) as well as two clinical cases aHeparin plasma hscTnT sample
taken 5 h after race-induced upper respiratory crisis event bHeparin plasma hscTnT sample taken 41 h after initially presented to clinic
cIndicates a significant difference from Non-Competition HorsesNon-Competition Horses: Plasma samples were taken from 125 non-performance,
healthy horses (ages 2–24; median 5 years, 69 geldings, 56 mares) represented by Quarter horses, Quarter horse-crosses, Thoroughbreds,
Warmbloods, Draft horses, and Arabians.Racing-Thoroughbreds: Plasma samples were taken from 178 healthy, fit, actively competing
Thoroughbred Chuckwagon racing geldings (ages 4–18; median 9 years) when the horses were at rest in the morning prior to races.For both
populations, a physical examination with heart auscultation was performed, and Telemetric ECG was run stall-side and observed for two
minutes on all horses. Horses were excluded for abnormal physical exam findings, murmurs Grades III or greater, or any arrhythmia other than
second-degree atrioventricular block. Horses had no known history of congenital or acquired cardiac abnormalities.Breed, diurnal and intra-
individual variationEvaluation of differences in hscTnT levels between breed was determined by sample collection from 25 horses representing
Warmbloods, Thoroughbreds, Quarter Horses, Arabians and Draft Horses (5 horses of each breed). In addition, diurnal and intra-individual
variation was assessed by sample collection from each horse every morning and evening for 5 consecutive days. Two selected case studies
demonstrating clinical use of hscTnT assayCase oneAn 11 year old Thoroughbred Chuckwagon gelding passed a mandatory racetrack veterinary
physical and lameness examination on the morning of a race. He had no history of previously administered medications. The gelding later
presented with near-collapse event at the end of his race secondary to an acute upper airway obstruction. The horse was diagnosed stall-
side, via auscultation, with ventricular tachycardia immediately following racing. Telemetric ECG was subsequently run stall-side
intermittently over 48 h. Plasma hscTnT analyte levels were measured at 5 and 72 h following the event.Case twoFourteen year old Quarter
Horse mare, 3 months pregnant, diagnosed with Neorickettsia risticii by PCR and showing acute clinical signs of cardiacimpairment,
hypovolemic shock, and systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Diagnostic testing was completed to document the status of the
patient in light of the primary colitis pathology (venous hematologic, blood chemistry, venous/arterial blood gas, urinalysis, fractional
excretion electrolyte ratios, and fecal PCR). Cardiac evaluation included physical examination, heart auscultation, 24-h Telemetric ECG, and
plasma hscTnT analyte levels, but lacked cardiac ultrasonography (due to logistical restrictions associated with isolation hospitalization
of a severe diarrhea case). Following euthanasia, post-mortem examination with selected histology was performed. Genetic homologyUtilizing
NCBI protein BLAST, Homo sapiens cardiac Troponin-T amino acid residues of epitopes recognized by capture MAb (M7) (125–131:DRIERR) and
detection MAb (M11.7) (136–147:EQQRIRNEREKE) for the hscTnT assay were compared to Equus caballus cardiac and skeletal Troponin-T
(Fig. 1).Fig. 1Amino acid sequence alignment of human cardiac Troponin-T (Type 2) adult isoform (cTnT) with horse (Equus caballus) cardiac
Troponin-T (Type 2) and homology with equine fast and slow skeletal muscle TnT using NCBI protein BLAST. Amino acid sequences include the
epitope regions against which the Roche, Cobas-e601 capture (M7) and detection (M11.7) antibodies are directed Utilizing NCBI protein BLAST,
Homo sapiens cardiac Troponin-T amino acid residues of epitopes recognized by capture MAb (M7) (125–131:DRIERR) and detection MAb (M11.7)
(136–147:EQQRIRNEREKE) for the hscTnT assay were compared to Equus caballus cardiac and skeletal Troponin-T (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Amino acid
sequence alignment of human cardiac Troponin-T (Type 2) adult isoform (cTnT) with horse (Equus caballus) cardiac Troponin-T (Type 2) and
homology with equine fast and slow skeletal muscle TnT using NCBI protein BLAST. Amino acid sequences include the epitope regions against
which the Roche, Cobas-e601 capture (M7) and detection (M11.7) antibodies are directed Amino acid sequence alignment of human cardiac
Troponin-T (Type 2) adult isoform (cTnT) with horse (Equus caballus) cardiac Troponin-T (Type 2) and homology with equine fast and slow
skeletal muscle TnT using NCBI protein BLAST. Amino acid sequences include the epitope regions against which the Roche, Cobas-e601 capture
(M7) and detection (M11.7) antibodies are directed Analytical validation of ‘high-sensitivity’ cardiac Troponin-T assayRoche Diagnostics
cardiac Troponin-T ‘high-sensitivity’ assay, Cobas-e601 AnalyzerHscTnT assay, a 5th generation electrochemiluminescence immunoassay, was
used on the Cobas-e601 Analyzer for analysis of equine plasma samples, complying with manufacturer’s instructions and CLS internal quality
controls systems. The manufacturer determined the analytical characteristics for this assay in accordance with the CLSI-EP17-A2
requirements. The analyzer was calibrated using human cTnT standards supplied for use of the hscTnT assay kit with human plasma.Equine
Troponin-T samplesPurified equine cardiac troponin used in linearity and precision studies was obtained from harvested equine myocardium as
previously described . Plasma samples were collected from all live horses, by jugular venipuncture in 5 mL lithium-heparinized tubes.
Specimens were centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 min, separated, frozen within 90 min, and stored at−80 °C until batch analyzed. Degree of
hemolysis in all samples was assessed using the serum indices instrument application on the Roche Cobas-e601 platform2 and no specimen
included in this study reached the hemolysis threshold to be excluded.Tissue specificityHomogenates of cardiac and skeletal muscle harvested
from a healthy horse were prepared as previously described and subsequently diluted.3 Dilutions used were within the linear range of the
hscTnT assay (cardiac: 100,000 fold, skeletal muscle: 10,000 fold). The tissue reactivities, expressed in ng/L wet weight, were corrected
for the dilution factor and are presented as means ± SEM. Tissue Reactivity (ng/g of wet tissue) = x hscTnT(ng/L) x dilution factor ÷ weight
of muscle sample(g) x dilution of original homogenate muscle stock.Linear dose responseN = 10 dilutions were prepared from purified equine
cardiac troponin stock by serial 1:2 dilution (from 1:100 to 1:0.2) using normal equine plasma (hscTnT 3.28 ng/L) as diluent. Triplicates of
the resultant 11 samples (mean hscTnT levels ranging from 8.0 to 3526.7 ng/L) were analyzed to detect linearity over the expected measurable
range.Assay precisionWithin-run precision was evaluated by assaying plasma samples from 3 horses containing 3 different previously
determined (Roche Diagnostics hscTnT assay) concentrations of hscTnT (L1 = 6.5 ng/L, L2 = 10.1 ng/L, L3 = 15.3 ng/L) 10 times in the same
run. Between-run precision was evaluated by assaying prepared quality control samples consisting of purified equine cardiac troponin diluted
with equine plasma at 3 levels (L1 = 12.2 ng/L, L2 = 56.9 ng/L, L3 = 254.0 ng/L) over 3 months and 10 different runs.Functional
sensitivityThe limit of quantitation (LoQ), defined as the lowest analyte concentration that can be reproducibly measured with a between-run
CV ≤ 10 %, was determined using 5 serial dilutions of a stock, diluted, purified equine cardiac troponin sample (hscTnT range 4-37 ng/L),
and analysing each dilution 5 times in 1 day.Stability studyStability of samples was tested at−80 °C for a period of 24 months. Samples were
measured at the start and end of the testing period and the average difference between the measured values before and after storage was
calculated. Criteria for significant change: average difference of less than 2X the between-run standard deviation of the control level
closest to the mean of samples measured.Comparison studyEleven diluted, purified equine cardiac troponin samples of various increasing,
known hscTnT levels (previously determined using Roche Diagnostics assay), were run in duplicate on the iSTAT for equine cTnI analyte levels
allowing for comparison of hscTnT to older generation cTnI results. Roche Diagnostics cardiac Troponin-T ‘high-sensitivity’ assay,
Cobas-e601 AnalyzerHscTnT assay, a 5th generation electrochemiluminescence immunoassay, was used on the Cobas-e601 Analyzer for analysis of
equine plasma samples, complying with manufacturer’s instructions and CLS internal quality controls systems. The manufacturer determined the
analytical characteristics for this assay in accordance with the CLSI-EP17-A2 requirements. The analyzer was calibrated using human cTnT
standards supplied for use of the hscTnT assay kit with human plasma. HscTnT assay, a 5th generation electrochemiluminescence immunoassay,
was used on the Cobas-e601 Analyzer for analysis of equine plasma samples, complying with manufacturer’s instructions and CLS internal
quality controls systems. The manufacturer determined the analytical characteristics for this assay in accordance with the CLSI-EP17-A2
requirements. The analyzer was calibrated using human cTnT standards supplied for use of the hscTnT assay kit with human plasma. Equine
Troponin-T samplesPurified equine cardiac troponin used in linearity and precision studies was obtained from harvested equine myocardium as
previously described . Plasma samples were collected from all live horses, by jugular venipuncture in 5 mL lithium-heparinized tubes.
Specimens were centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 min, separated, frozen within 90 min, and stored at−80 °C until batch analyzed. Degree of
hemolysis in all samples was assessed using the serum indices instrument application on the Roche Cobas-e601 platform2 and no specimen
included in this study reached the hemolysis threshold to be excluded. Purified equine cardiac troponin used in linearity and precision
studies was obtained from harvested equine myocardium as previously described . Plasma samples were collected from all live horses, by
jugular venipuncture in 5 mL lithium-heparinized tubes. Specimens were centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 min, separated, frozen within 90 min,
and stored at−80 °C until batch analyzed. Degree of hemolysis in all samples was assessed using the serum indices instrument application on
the Roche Cobas-e601 platform2 and no specimen included in this study reached the hemolysis threshold to be excluded. Tissue
specificityHomogenates of cardiac and skeletal muscle harvested from a healthy horse were prepared as previously described and subsequently
diluted.3 Dilutions used were within the linear range of the hscTnT assay (cardiac: 100,000 fold, skeletal muscle: 10,000 fold). The tissue
reactivities, expressed in ng/L wet weight, were corrected for the dilution factor and are presented as means ± SEM. Tissue Reactivity (ng/g
of wet tissue) = x hscTnT(ng/L) x dilution factor ÷ weight of muscle sample(g) x dilution of original homogenate muscle stock. Homogenates
of cardiac and skeletal muscle harvested from a healthy horse were prepared as previously described and subsequently diluted.3 Dilutions
used were within the linear range of the hscTnT assay (cardiac: 100,000 fold, skeletal muscle: 10,000 fold). The tissue reactivities,
expressed in ng/L wet weight, were corrected for the dilution factor and are presented as means ± SEM. Tissue Reactivity (ng/g of wet
tissue) = x hscTnT(ng/L) x dilution factor ÷ weight of muscle sample(g) x dilution of original homogenate muscle stock. Linear dose
responseN = 10 dilutions were prepared from purified equine cardiac troponin stock by serial 1:2 dilution (from 1:100 to 1:0.2) using normal
equine plasma (hscTnT 3.28 ng/L) as diluent. Triplicates of the resultant 11 samples (mean hscTnT levels ranging from 8.0 to 3526.7 ng/L)
were analyzed to detect linearity over the expected measurable range. N = 10 dilutions were prepared from purified equine cardiac troponin
stock by serial 1:2 dilution (from 1:100 to 1:0.2) using normal equine plasma (hscTnT 3.28 ng/L) as diluent. Triplicates of the resultant 11
samples (mean hscTnT levels ranging from 8.0 to 3526.7 ng/L) were analyzed to detect linearity over the expected measurable range. Assay
precisionWithin-run precision was evaluated by assaying plasma samples from 3 horses containing 3 different previously determined (Roche
Diagnostics hscTnT assay) concentrations of hscTnT (L1 = 6.5 ng/L, L2 = 10.1 ng/L, L3 = 15.3 ng/L) 10 times in the same run. Between-run
precision was evaluated by assaying prepared quality control samples consisting of purified equine cardiac troponin diluted with equine
plasma at 3 levels (L1 = 12.2 ng/L, L2 = 56.9 ng/L, L3 = 254.0 ng/L) over 3 months and 10 different runs. Within-run precision was evaluated
by assaying plasma samples from 3 horses containing 3 different previously determined (Roche Diagnostics hscTnT assay) concentrations of
hscTnT (L1 = 6.5 ng/L, L2 = 10.1 ng/L, L3 = 15.3 ng/L) 10 times in the same run. Between-run precision was evaluated by assaying prepared
quality control samples consisting of purified equine cardiac troponin diluted with equine plasma at 3 levels (L1 = 12.2 ng/L,
L2 = 56.9 ng/L, L3 = 254.0 ng/L) over 3 months and 10 different runs. Functional sensitivityThe limit of quantitation (LoQ), defined as the
lowest analyte concentration that can be reproducibly measured with a between-run CV ≤ 10 %, was determined using 5 serial dilutions of a
stock, diluted, purified equine cardiac troponin sample (hscTnT range 4-37 ng/L), and analysing each dilution 5 times in 1 day. The limit of
quantitation (LoQ), defined as the lowest analyte concentration that can be reproducibly measured with a between-run CV ≤ 10 %, was
determined using 5 serial dilutions of a stock, diluted, purified equine cardiac troponin sample (hscTnT range 4-37 ng/L), and analysing
each dilution 5 times in 1 day. Stability studyStability of samples was tested at−80 °C for a period of 24 months. Samples were measured at
the start and end of the testing period and the average difference between the measured values before and after storage was calculated.
Criteria for significant change: average difference of less than 2X the between-run standard deviation of the control level closest to the
mean of samples measured. Stability of samples was tested at−80 °C for a period of 24 months. Samples were measured at the start and end of
the testing period and the average difference between the measured values before and after storage was calculated. Criteria for significant
change: average difference of less than 2X the between-run standard deviation of the control level closest to the mean of samples measured.
Comparison studyEleven diluted, purified equine cardiac troponin samples of various increasing, known hscTnT levels (previously determined
using Roche Diagnostics assay), were run in duplicate on the iSTAT for equine cTnI analyte levels allowing for comparison of hscTnT to older
generation cTnI results. Eleven diluted, purified equine cardiac troponin samples of various increasing, known hscTnT levels (previously
determined using Roche Diagnostics assay), were run in duplicate on the iSTAT for equine cTnI analyte levels allowing for comparison of
hscTnT to older generation cTnI results. Reference intervals and biological variation of hscTnT levels in healthy horsesTwo subset
populations were included in the study and sampled by convenience (summer 2013): one group of Non-Competition Horses with varying levels of
routine physical activity and a second group of Racing-Thoroughbred geldings (Table 1). These populations provide reference intervals of
troponin levels for application of the assay in sports medicine and exercise physiology in addition to general application in clinical
cardiomyopathy cases. The study was approved by the UCVM-Veterinary Sciences Animal Care Committee and consent was obtained from the
animals’ owners.Table 1Comparison of ages, sexes, breeds and resting heparin plasma hscTnT concentrations in horsesNumber12517811Non-
Competition HorsesRacing- ThoroughbredsClinical Case IClinical Case IIMedian Age (Range)5 (2–24)9 (4–18)1114Sexes56 Mares,69 Geldings178
GeldingsGeldingMareBreed(s)TB, QH, Drafts, Arabians, WBTBTBQHResting hscTnTMean (±SD), ng/L3.6 (±2.1)5.4 (±3.8)221.0a 5723.0b hscTnT Median,
ng/L3.04.0c N/AN/AhscTnT Range, ng/L3.0–17.03.0–24.0N/AN/AhscTnT 95 % URL (90 % CI), ng/L6.79(6.0–12.0)14.0(10.0–18.0)N/AN/AhscTnT 99 % URL
(90 % CI), ng/L16.2(N/A)23.2(N/A)N/AN/AComparison of ages, sexes, breeds and resting heparin plasma hscTnT concentrations from 303
apparently healthy horses (Non-Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds) as well as two clinical cases aHeparin plasma hscTnT sample
taken 5 h after race-induced upper respiratory crisis event bHeparin plasma hscTnT sample taken 41 h after initially presented to clinic
cIndicates a significant difference from Non-Competition HorsesNon-Competition Horses: Plasma samples were taken from 125 non-performance,
healthy horses (ages 2–24; median 5 years, 69 geldings, 56 mares) represented by Quarter horses, Quarter horse-crosses, Thoroughbreds,
Warmbloods, Draft horses, and Arabians.Racing-Thoroughbreds: Plasma samples were taken from 178 healthy, fit, actively competing
Thoroughbred Chuckwagon racing geldings (ages 4–18; median 9 years) when the horses were at rest in the morning prior to races.For both
populations, a physical examination with heart auscultation was performed, and Telemetric ECG was run stall-side and observed for two
minutes on all horses. Horses were excluded for abnormal physical exam findings, murmurs Grades III or greater, or any arrhythmia other than
second-degree atrioventricular block. Horses had no known history of congenital or acquired cardiac abnormalities.Breed, diurnal and intra-
individual variationEvaluation of differences in hscTnT levels between breed was determined by sample collection from 25 horses representing
Warmbloods, Thoroughbreds, Quarter Horses, Arabians and Draft Horses (5 horses of each breed). In addition, diurnal and intra-individual
variation was assessed by sample collection from each horse every morning and evening for 5 consecutive days. Two subset populations were
included in the study and sampled by convenience (summer 2013): one group of Non-Competition Horses with varying levels of routine physical
activity and a second group of Racing-Thoroughbred geldings (Table 1). These populations provide reference intervals of troponin levels for
application of the assay in sports medicine and exercise physiology in addition to general application in clinical cardiomyopathy cases. The
study was approved by the UCVM-Veterinary Sciences Animal Care Committee and consent was obtained from the animals’ owners.Table 1Comparison
of ages, sexes, breeds and resting heparin plasma hscTnT concentrations in horsesNumber12517811Non-Competition HorsesRacing-
ThoroughbredsClinical Case IClinical Case IIMedian Age (Range)5 (2–24)9 (4–18)1114Sexes56 Mares,69 Geldings178
GeldingsGeldingMareBreed(s)TB, QH, Drafts, Arabians, WBTBTBQHResting hscTnTMean (±SD), ng/L3.6 (±2.1)5.4 (±3.8)221.0a 5723.0b hscTnT Median,
ng/L3.04.0c N/AN/AhscTnT Range, ng/L3.0–17.03.0–24.0N/AN/AhscTnT 95 % URL (90 % CI), ng/L6.79(6.0–12.0)14.0(10.0–18.0)N/AN/AhscTnT 99 % URL
(90 % CI), ng/L16.2(N/A)23.2(N/A)N/AN/AComparison of ages, sexes, breeds and resting heparin plasma hscTnT concentrations from 303
apparently healthy horses (Non-Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds) as well as two clinical cases aHeparin plasma hscTnT sample
taken 5 h after race-induced upper respiratory crisis event bHeparin plasma hscTnT sample taken 41 h after initially presented to clinic
cIndicates a significant difference from Non-Competition HorsesNon-Competition Horses: Plasma samples were taken from 125 non-performance,
healthy horses (ages 2–24; median 5 years, 69 geldings, 56 mares) represented by Quarter horses, Quarter horse-crosses, Thoroughbreds,
Warmbloods, Draft horses, and Arabians.Racing-Thoroughbreds: Plasma samples were taken from 178 healthy, fit, actively competing
Thoroughbred Chuckwagon racing geldings (ages 4–18; median 9 years) when the horses were at rest in the morning prior to races. Comparison
of ages, sexes, breeds and resting heparin plasma hscTnT concentrations in horses Comparison of ages, sexes, breeds and resting heparin
plasma hscTnT concentrations from 303 apparently healthy horses (Non-Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds) as well as two clinical
cases aHeparin plasma hscTnT sample taken 5 h after race-induced upper respiratory crisis event bHeparin plasma hscTnT sample taken 41 h
after initially presented to clinic cIndicates a significant difference from Non-Competition Horses Non-Competition Horses: Plasma samples
were taken from 125 non-performance, healthy horses (ages 2–24; median 5 years, 69 geldings, 56 mares) represented by Quarter horses,
Quarter horse-crosses, Thoroughbreds, Warmbloods, Draft horses, and Arabians. Racing-Thoroughbreds: Plasma samples were taken from 178
healthy, fit, actively competing Thoroughbred Chuckwagon racing geldings (ages 4–18; median 9 years) when the horses were at rest in the
morning prior to races. For both populations, a physical examination with heart auscultation was performed, and Telemetric ECG was run
stall-side and observed for two minutes on all horses. Horses were excluded for abnormal physical exam findings, murmurs Grades III or
greater, or any arrhythmia other than second-degree atrioventricular block. Horses had no known history of congenital or acquired cardiac
abnormalities. Breed, diurnal and intra-individual variationEvaluation of differences in hscTnT levels between breed was determined by
sample collection from 25 horses representing Warmbloods, Thoroughbreds, Quarter Horses, Arabians and Draft Horses (5 horses of each breed).
In addition, diurnal and intra-individual variation was assessed by sample collection from each horse every morning and evening for 5
consecutive days. Evaluation of differences in hscTnT levels between breed was determined by sample collection from 25 horses representing
Warmbloods, Thoroughbreds, Quarter Horses, Arabians and Draft Horses (5 horses of each breed). In addition, diurnal and intra-individual
variation was assessed by sample collection from each horse every morning and evening for 5 consecutive days. Two selected case studies
demonstrating clinical use of hscTnT assayCase oneAn 11 year old Thoroughbred Chuckwagon gelding passed a mandatory racetrack veterinary
physical and lameness examination on the morning of a race. He had no history of previously administered medications. The gelding later
presented with near-collapse event at the end of his race secondary to an acute upper airway obstruction. The horse was diagnosed stall-
side, via auscultation, with ventricular tachycardia immediately following racing. Telemetric ECG was subsequently run stall-side
intermittently over 48 h. Plasma hscTnT analyte levels were measured at 5 and 72 h following the event.Case twoFourteen year old Quarter
Horse mare, 3 months pregnant, diagnosed with Neorickettsia risticii by PCR and showing acute clinical signs of cardiacimpairment,
hypovolemic shock, and systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Diagnostic testing was completed to document the status of the
patient in light of the primary colitis pathology (venous hematologic, blood chemistry, venous/arterial blood gas, urinalysis, fractional
excretion electrolyte ratios, and fecal PCR). Cardiac evaluation included physical examination, heart auscultation, 24-h Telemetric ECG, and
plasma hscTnT analyte levels, but lacked cardiac ultrasonography (due to logistical restrictions associated with isolation hospitalization
of a severe diarrhea case). Following euthanasia, post-mortem examination with selected histology was performed. Case oneAn 11 year old
Thoroughbred Chuckwagon gelding passed a mandatory racetrack veterinary physical and lameness examination on the morning of a race. He had
no history of previously administered medications. The gelding later presented with near-collapse event at the end of his race secondary to
an acute upper airway obstruction. The horse was diagnosed stall-side, via auscultation, with ventricular tachycardia immediately following
racing. Telemetric ECG was subsequently run stall-side intermittently over 48 h. Plasma hscTnT analyte levels were measured at 5 and 72 h
following the event. An 11 year old Thoroughbred Chuckwagon gelding passed a mandatory racetrack veterinary physical and lameness
examination on the morning of a race. He had no history of previously administered medications. The gelding later presented with near-
collapse event at the end of his race secondary to an acute upper airway obstruction. The horse was diagnosed stall-side, via auscultation,
with ventricular tachycardia immediately following racing. Telemetric ECG was subsequently run stall-side intermittently over 48 h. Plasma
hscTnT analyte levels were measured at 5 and 72 h following the event. Case twoFourteen year old Quarter Horse mare, 3 months pregnant,
diagnosed with Neorickettsia risticii by PCR and showing acute clinical signs of cardiacimpairment, hypovolemic shock, and systemic
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Diagnostic testing was completed to document the status of the patient in light of the primary
colitis pathology (venous hematologic, blood chemistry, venous/arterial blood gas, urinalysis, fractional excretion electrolyte ratios, and
fecal PCR). Cardiac evaluation included physical examination, heart auscultation, 24-h Telemetric ECG, and plasma hscTnT analyte levels, but
lacked cardiac ultrasonography (due to logistical restrictions associated with isolation hospitalization of a severe diarrhea case).
Following euthanasia, post-mortem examination with selected histology was performed. Fourteen year old Quarter Horse mare, 3 months
pregnant, diagnosed with Neorickettsia risticii by PCR and showing acute clinical signs of cardiacimpairment, hypovolemic shock, and
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Diagnostic testing was completed to document the status of the patient in light of the
primary colitis pathology (venous hematologic, blood chemistry, venous/arterial blood gas, urinalysis, fractional excretion electrolyte
ratios, and fecal PCR). Cardiac evaluation included physical examination, heart auscultation, 24-h Telemetric ECG, and plasma hscTnT analyte
levels, but lacked cardiac ultrasonography (due to logistical restrictions associated with isolation hospitalization of a severe diarrhea
case). Following euthanasia, post-mortem examination with selected histology was performed. Linearity and LoQ were determined using Analyse-
it software5. Linearity of the assay was assessed by linear and polynomial regression of the data and difference plot with Total Error
criteria. A Weighted Deming fit was used to compare the fit between the hscTnT assay versus the cTnI assay. The hscTnT population
distributions were not normal using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. CLSI-28A3C guidelines recommend Dixon’s and Tukey’s techniques for outlier
detection, however both are based on the assumption that there is a normal distribution to the population data . Due to the severity of the
right-skewed population in this case, normalization of the data is unreliable with transformation techniques such as Box-Cox transformation.
Consequently, visual inspection was selected as a screening method and no outliers were detected in the populations tested. The Mann-Whitney
U test was utilized to test the difference between the hscTnT levels in the two horse sub-populations. Nonparametric methods, complying with
CLSI guidelines, were used for determination of the 95th and 99th percentiles and 90 % confidence intervals for horses from each population.
Analytical validation of ‘high-sensitivity’ cardiac Troponin-T assayGenetic homologyThe epitopes detected by this commercial hscTnT assay
were conserved between humans and horses with 100 % homology detected when comparing human adult cardiac isoform cTnT and equine cTnT ,
while only 80 % and 56 % conservation was shown between human adult cTnT and equine fast and slow skeletal muscle respectively
(Fig. 1).Tissue specificityAlthough there was some minimal detectable reactivity from equine skeletal muscle in the hscTnT immunoassay,
hscTnT reactivity of cardiac muscle was 256.2 times greater than that in skeletal muscle (2.49 x107 and 9.75 x104 ng/g wet weight
respectively).Linear dose responseWhile linear dose response was tested in the range of 8–3527 ng/L, the assay was linear over the hscTnT
range of 3–391 ng/L (±2 ng/L or 5 %). Above 391 ng/L there is bias in the regression with over-recovery of the analyte demonstrated and even
when the linearity criteria are widened (to ±5 ng/L or 20 %) the response is significantly non-linear (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Plot of the linearity
(triplicates of increasing concentrations of equine hscTnT) of the Roche, Cobas-e601 hscTnT assay. a, b Linear to a level of 391 ng/L
(±2 ng/L or 5 %). c, d Linearity run up to 3500 ng/L shows over-recoveryAssay precisionWithin-run precision was: L1 = 6.5 ng/L, CV 14.9 %,
L2 = 10.1 ng/L, CV 8.7 %, L3 = 15.3 ng/L, CV 5.4 % and between-run precision was: L1 = 12.2 ng/L, CV 8.4 %, L2 = 57.0 ng/L, CV 8.4 %,
L3 = 256.0 ng/L, CV 9.0 % (Table 2). In humans studies, the required precision is 10 % within-run CV at the upper limit of normal for the
population. The horse specimens have < 10 % CV at the levels closest to the upper reference limit (99th percentile) in both horse
populations tested (Table 2).Table 2Precision of the hscTnT assay (Roche Diagnostics, Cobas-e601) for measuring equine plasmaLevel 1
(L1)Level 2 (L2)Level 3 (L3)Within-Run hscTnTMean (CV), ng/L6.5 (14.9 %)10.1 (8.7 %)15.3 (5.4 %)Between-Run hscTnT Mean (CV), ng/L12.2
(8.4 %)57.0 (8.4 %)256.0 (9.0 %) Abbreviations: CV Coefficient of variation (in %)Precision of the hscTnT assay (Roche Diagnostics,
Cobas-e601) for measuring equine plasma hscTnT of three increasing levels (Level 1, 2, 3) on 10 separate occasionsFunctional sensitivity
(Limit of Quantitation)The LoQ was validated at 3 ng/L (using a 10 % CV).Stability studyThe stability of the samples was excellent and
demonstrated slight, but not statistically significant decrease in hscTnT analyte over the average 24 month period between free-thaw cycles
(mean = 15.8 ng/L, average difference = 1.75 ng/L).Comparison studyComparison with cTn-I assay showed excellent correlation (range:
8–3535 ng/L, R2 = 0.9996). Bias was evident in the Deming regression results [hscTnT = (0.6 ± 0.0028)*(cTnI*1000)–(11.5 ± 5.5)]
(Fig. 3).Fig. 3Correlation between cTn concentration in duplicates of equine plasma samples of increasing levels as measured by the Roche,
Cobas-e601 hscTnT assay and the iSTAT cTnI assay. Correlation between the 2 methods was high (range: 8–3535 ng/L, r = 0.9998). Bias was
evident in the Deming regression results [hscTnT = (0.6 ± 0.0028)*(cTnI*1000)–(11.5 ± 5.5)] Biological variation of hscTnT levels in healthy
horsesReference interval determination of two subset populationsHscTnT levels were different between the Non-Competition Horses and Racing-
Thoroughbreds (p < 0.0001) (Table 1). As such, the populations have been considered separately with respect to upper reference limits. The
upper 95th (90 % CI) and 99th percentile of the population distribution in Non-Competitive Horses (N = 125) is 6.8 (90 % CI:6.0–12.0) and
16.2 ng/L and for Racing-Thoroughbreds (N = 178) is 14.0 (90 % CI:10.0–18.0) and 23.2 ng/L, respectively (Table 1 and Fig. 4). Lower
reference limits are not clinically relevant and are defined by the LoQ of the assay (3 ng/L). 90 % CI could not be calculated for the 99th
percentile due N value restrictions . Measureable hscTn analyte levels were obtained in 56.8 and 88.8 % for Non-Competition Horses and
Racing-Thoroughbreds groups respectively.Fig. 4Frequency distribution for hscTnT levels in Non-Competition Horses and Racing-
ThoroughbredsBreed, diurnal and intra-individual variation in Non-Competition Horse populationThe assay did not have sufficient sensitivity
to assess between breed, diurnal effect and between-day variation in Non-Competition Horses partly due to low levels of hscTnT (43.2 % of
this reference population had average values ≤ 3 ng/L) (Fig. 4). Two selected case studies demonstrating clinical use of hscTnT assayCase
oneThe 11 year old TB Chuckwagon horse had previously passed a veterinary physical and lameness examination on the morning of the race. The
gelding finished the 0.5 mile race in distress and presented immediately for assessment. Examination showed cyanotic mucous membranes and
persistent tachycardia (heart rate: 180 bpm). No cardiac murmurs were noted on auscultation. Ventricular tachycardia was confirmed on ECG
that converted to atrial fibrillation within 30 min and spontaneously returned to sinus rhythm with supportive therapy, but no conversion
treatment, within 12 h. The plasma sample taken 5 h after the race for hscTnT had a value of 221 ng/L; by 72 h the hscTnT value was 21 ng/L.
Five weeks later, a standing and over-the-ground dynamic endoscopy during exercise revealed a subepiglottic cyst with a severe retroversion
of the epiglottis during maximal effort.Case twoThe 14 year old QH mare was diagnosed with Potomac Horse Fever, and SIRS (based on
tachycardia, fever, abnormal WBC count, as well as severe elevations in lactate and toxic, tacky mucous membranes) . On admission the mare
had severe electrolyte imbalances, endotoxemia (toxic neutrophils noted), acute renal failure, and liver impairments (Table 3). Despite
emergency symptomatic treatment she remained unstable and showed deterioration in cardiovascular status (development of severe
bradyarrhythmia with intermittent long sinusal pauses for up to 40 s, pale mucous membranes, and weak pulses), as well as ongoing severe
diarrhea. A plasma sample taken for hscTnT 41 h following initial presentation measured 5723 ng/L. The mare was euthanized 44 h after
initial presentation and post mortem findings included a moderately enlarged heart, failure of left ventricle to contract completely after
rigor mortis, multifocal myocardial necrosis, and congestion of the liver all suggestive of myocardial function impairment.Table 3Case two
selected laboratory resultsTime ofadmission36 hPost-adm.COMPLETE BLOOD COUNTRBC (x 1012/L) 10.95.7Hct (%) 4422.7WBC (x 1012/L) 13.67.1NEU (x
1012/L) 10.25.6LYM (x 1012/L) 2.41.1MONO (x 1012/L) 1.00.4EOS (x 1012/L) 00BASO (x 1012/L) 0.020.01PLT (K/μL) 238196Fibrinogen Manual
(g/L)75CHEMISTRYUREA (mmol/L) > 46.440.6CREA (μmol/L) Too high to reportToo high to reportCA (mmol/L) 2.12.7Total Protein (g/L) 7749ALB
(g/L) 2918GLOB (g/L) 4831AST (U/L) 410442ALKP (U/L) 195134GGT (U/L) 1720TBIL (μmol/L) 2520CK (U/L) 505361LDH (U/L) 16942058Na (mmol/L)
104147K (mmol/L) 2.32.4Cl (mmol/L) 79116HscTnT (ng/L)5723BLOOD GASVenousArterialpH (7.35–7.45)7.37.3pCO2 (mmHg) 40.438.4PO2 (mmHg)4861HCO3
(mmol/L) 1818.9 T CO2 (mmol/L) 1920Base Excess [−5 to +5]−9−8sO2 (%)7789Lactate (mmol/L) 3.00.9URINEUSG1.009Fraction of Excretion–Na
(%)40Fraction of Excretion–Cl (%)68Fraction of Excretion–K (%)157Selected laboratory results for Case two, a 14 year old QH mare diagnosed
with Potomac Horse Fever, and subsequent myocardial damage Analytical validation of ‘high-sensitivity’ cardiac Troponin-T assayGenetic
homologyThe epitopes detected by this commercial hscTnT assay were conserved between humans and horses with 100 % homology detected when
comparing human adult cardiac isoform cTnT and equine cTnT , while only 80 % and 56 % conservation was shown between human adult cTnT and
equine fast and slow skeletal muscle respectively (Fig. 1).Tissue specificityAlthough there was some minimal detectable reactivity from
equine skeletal muscle in the hscTnT immunoassay, hscTnT reactivity of cardiac muscle was 256.2 times greater than that in skeletal muscle
(2.49 x107 and 9.75 x104 ng/g wet weight respectively).Linear dose responseWhile linear dose response was tested in the range of
8–3527 ng/L, the assay was linear over the hscTnT range of 3–391 ng/L (±2 ng/L or 5 %). Above 391 ng/L there is bias in the regression with
over-recovery of the analyte demonstrated and even when the linearity criteria are widened (to ±5 ng/L or 20 %) the response is
significantly non-linear (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Plot of the linearity (triplicates of increasing concentrations of equine hscTnT) of the Roche,
Cobas-e601 hscTnT assay. a, b Linear to a level of 391 ng/L (±2 ng/L or 5 %). c, d Linearity run up to 3500 ng/L shows over-recoveryAssay
precisionWithin-run precision was: L1 = 6.5 ng/L, CV 14.9 %, L2 = 10.1 ng/L, CV 8.7 %, L3 = 15.3 ng/L, CV 5.4 % and between-run precision
was: L1 = 12.2 ng/L, CV 8.4 %, L2 = 57.0 ng/L, CV 8.4 %, L3 = 256.0 ng/L, CV 9.0 % (Table 2). In humans studies, the required precision is
10 % within-run CV at the upper limit of normal for the population. The horse specimens have < 10 % CV at the levels closest to the upper
reference limit (99th percentile) in both horse populations tested (Table 2).Table 2Precision of the hscTnT assay (Roche Diagnostics,
Cobas-e601) for measuring equine plasmaLevel 1 (L1)Level 2 (L2)Level 3 (L3)Within-Run hscTnTMean (CV), ng/L6.5 (14.9 %)10.1 (8.7 %)15.3
(5.4 %)Between-Run hscTnT Mean (CV), ng/L12.2 (8.4 %)57.0 (8.4 %)256.0 (9.0 %) Abbreviations: CV Coefficient of variation (in %)Precision of
the hscTnT assay (Roche Diagnostics, Cobas-e601) for measuring equine plasma hscTnT of three increasing levels (Level 1, 2, 3) on 10
separate occasionsFunctional sensitivity (Limit of Quantitation)The LoQ was validated at 3 ng/L (using a 10 % CV).Stability studyThe
stability of the samples was excellent and demonstrated slight, but not statistically significant decrease in hscTnT analyte over the
average 24 month period between free-thaw cycles (mean = 15.8 ng/L, average difference = 1.75 ng/L).Comparison studyComparison with cTn-I
assay showed excellent correlation (range: 8–3535 ng/L, R2 = 0.9996). Bias was evident in the Deming regression results
[hscTnT = (0.6 ± 0.0028)*(cTnI*1000)–(11.5 ± 5.5)] (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Correlation between cTn concentration in duplicates of equine plasma
samples of increasing levels as measured by the Roche, Cobas-e601 hscTnT assay and the iSTAT cTnI assay. Correlation between the 2 methods
was high (range: 8–3535 ng/L, r = 0.9998). Bias was evident in the Deming regression results
[hscTnT = (0.6 ± 0.0028)*(cTnI*1000)–(11.5 ± 5.5)] Genetic homologyThe epitopes detected by this commercial hscTnT assay were conserved
between humans and horses with 100 % homology detected when comparing human adult cardiac isoform cTnT and equine cTnT , while only 80 % and
56 % conservation was shown between human adult cTnT and equine fast and slow skeletal muscle respectively (Fig. 1). The epitopes detected
by this commercial hscTnT assay were conserved between humans and horses with 100 % homology detected when comparing human adult cardiac
isoform cTnT and equine cTnT , while only 80 % and 56 % conservation was shown between human adult cTnT and equine fast and slow skeletal
muscle respectively (Fig. 1). Tissue specificityAlthough there was some minimal detectable reactivity from equine skeletal muscle in the
hscTnT immunoassay, hscTnT reactivity of cardiac muscle was 256.2 times greater than that in skeletal muscle (2.49 x107 and 9.75 x104 ng/g
wet weight respectively). Although there was some minimal detectable reactivity from equine skeletal muscle in the hscTnT immunoassay,
hscTnT reactivity of cardiac muscle was 256.2 times greater than that in skeletal muscle (2.49 x107 and 9.75 x104 ng/g wet weight
respectively). Linear dose responseWhile linear dose response was tested in the range of 8–3527 ng/L, the assay was linear over the hscTnT
range of 3–391 ng/L (±2 ng/L or 5 %). Above 391 ng/L there is bias in the regression with over-recovery of the analyte demonstrated and even
when the linearity criteria are widened (to ±5 ng/L or 20 %) the response is significantly non-linear (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Plot of the linearity
(triplicates of increasing concentrations of equine hscTnT) of the Roche, Cobas-e601 hscTnT assay. a, b Linear to a level of 391 ng/L
(±2 ng/L or 5 %). c, d Linearity run up to 3500 ng/L shows over-recovery While linear dose response was tested in the range of 8–3527 ng/L,
the assay was linear over the hscTnT range of 3–391 ng/L (±2 ng/L or 5 %). Above 391 ng/L there is bias in the regression with over-recovery
of the analyte demonstrated and even when the linearity criteria are widened (to ±5 ng/L or 20 %) the response is significantly non-linear
(Fig. 2).Fig. 2Plot of the linearity (triplicates of increasing concentrations of equine hscTnT) of the Roche, Cobas-e601 hscTnT assay. a, b
Linear to a level of 391 ng/L (±2 ng/L or 5 %). c, d Linearity run up to 3500 ng/L shows over-recovery Plot of the linearity (triplicates of
increasing concentrations of equine hscTnT) of the Roche, Cobas-e601 hscTnT assay. a, b Linear to a level of 391 ng/L (±2 ng/L or 5 %). c, d
Linearity run up to 3500 ng/L shows over-recovery Assay precisionWithin-run precision was: L1 = 6.5 ng/L, CV 14.9 %, L2 = 10.1 ng/L, CV
8.7 %, L3 = 15.3 ng/L, CV 5.4 % and between-run precision was: L1 = 12.2 ng/L, CV 8.4 %, L2 = 57.0 ng/L, CV 8.4 %, L3 = 256.0 ng/L, CV 9.0 %
(Table 2). In humans studies, the required precision is 10 % within-run CV at the upper limit of normal for the population. The horse
specimens have < 10 % CV at the levels closest to the upper reference limit (99th percentile) in both horse populations tested
(Table 2).Table 2Precision of the hscTnT assay (Roche Diagnostics, Cobas-e601) for measuring equine plasmaLevel 1 (L1)Level 2 (L2)Level 3
(L3)Within-Run hscTnTMean (CV), ng/L6.5 (14.9 %)10.1 (8.7 %)15.3 (5.4 %)Between-Run hscTnT Mean (CV), ng/L12.2 (8.4 %)57.0 (8.4 %)256.0
(9.0 %) Abbreviations: CV Coefficient of variation (in %)Precision of the hscTnT assay (Roche Diagnostics, Cobas-e601) for measuring equine
plasma hscTnT of three increasing levels (Level 1, 2, 3) on 10 separate occasions Within-run precision was: L1 = 6.5 ng/L, CV 14.9 %,
L2 = 10.1 ng/L, CV 8.7 %, L3 = 15.3 ng/L, CV 5.4 % and between-run precision was: L1 = 12.2 ng/L, CV 8.4 %, L2 = 57.0 ng/L, CV 8.4 %,
L3 = 256.0 ng/L, CV 9.0 % (Table 2). In humans studies, the required precision is 10 % within-run CV at the upper limit of normal for the
population. The horse specimens have < 10 % CV at the levels closest to the upper reference limit (99th percentile) in both horse
populations tested (Table 2).Table 2Precision of the hscTnT assay (Roche Diagnostics, Cobas-e601) for measuring equine plasmaLevel 1
(L1)Level 2 (L2)Level 3 (L3)Within-Run hscTnTMean (CV), ng/L6.5 (14.9 %)10.1 (8.7 %)15.3 (5.4 %)Between-Run hscTnT Mean (CV), ng/L12.2
(8.4 %)57.0 (8.4 %)256.0 (9.0 %) Abbreviations: CV Coefficient of variation (in %)Precision of the hscTnT assay (Roche Diagnostics,
Cobas-e601) for measuring equine plasma hscTnT of three increasing levels (Level 1, 2, 3) on 10 separate occasions Precision of the hscTnT
assay (Roche Diagnostics, Cobas-e601) for measuring equine plasma Abbreviations: CV Coefficient of variation (in %) Precision of the hscTnT
assay (Roche Diagnostics, Cobas-e601) for measuring equine plasma hscTnT of three increasing levels (Level 1, 2, 3) on 10 separate occasions
Functional sensitivity (Limit of Quantitation)The LoQ was validated at 3 ng/L (using a 10 % CV). The LoQ was validated at 3 ng/L (using a
10 % CV). Stability studyThe stability of the samples was excellent and demonstrated slight, but not statistically significant decrease in
hscTnT analyte over the average 24 month period between free-thaw cycles (mean = 15.8 ng/L, average difference = 1.75 ng/L). The stability
of the samples was excellent and demonstrated slight, but not statistically significant decrease in hscTnT analyte over the average 24 month
period between free-thaw cycles (mean = 15.8 ng/L, average difference = 1.75 ng/L). Comparison studyComparison with cTn-I assay showed
excellent correlation (range: 8–3535 ng/L, R2 = 0.9996). Bias was evident in the Deming regression results
[hscTnT = (0.6 ± 0.0028)*(cTnI*1000)–(11.5 ± 5.5)] (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Correlation between cTn concentration in duplicates of equine plasma
samples of increasing levels as measured by the Roche, Cobas-e601 hscTnT assay and the iSTAT cTnI assay. Correlation between the 2 methods
was high (range: 8–3535 ng/L, r = 0.9998). Bias was evident in the Deming regression results
[hscTnT = (0.6 ± 0.0028)*(cTnI*1000)–(11.5 ± 5.5)] Comparison with cTn-I assay showed excellent correlation (range: 8–3535 ng/L,
R2 = 0.9996). Bias was evident in the Deming regression results [hscTnT = (0.6 ± 0.0028)*(cTnI*1000)–(11.5 ± 5.5)] (Fig. 3).Fig.
3Correlation between cTn concentration in duplicates of equine plasma samples of increasing levels as measured by the Roche, Cobas-e601
hscTnT assay and the iSTAT cTnI assay. Correlation between the 2 methods was high (range: 8–3535 ng/L, r = 0.9998). Bias was evident in the
Deming regression results [hscTnT = (0.6 ± 0.0028)*(cTnI*1000)–(11.5 ± 5.5)] Correlation between cTn concentration in duplicates of equine
plasma samples of increasing levels as measured by the Roche, Cobas-e601 hscTnT assay and the iSTAT cTnI assay. Correlation between the 2
methods was high (range: 8–3535 ng/L, r = 0.9998). Bias was evident in the Deming regression results
[hscTnT = (0.6 ± 0.0028)*(cTnI*1000)–(11.5 ± 5.5)] Biological variation of hscTnT levels in healthy horsesReference interval determination
of two subset populationsHscTnT levels were different between the Non-Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds (p < 0.0001) (Table 1). As
such, the populations have been considered separately with respect to upper reference limits. The upper 95th (90 % CI) and 99th percentile
of the population distribution in Non-Competitive Horses (N = 125) is 6.8 (90 % CI:6.0–12.0) and 16.2 ng/L and for Racing-Thoroughbreds
(N = 178) is 14.0 (90 % CI:10.0–18.0) and 23.2 ng/L, respectively (Table 1 and Fig. 4). Lower reference limits are not clinically relevant
and are defined by the LoQ of the assay (3 ng/L). 90 % CI could not be calculated for the 99th percentile due N value restrictions .
Measureable hscTn analyte levels were obtained in 56.8 and 88.8 % for Non-Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds groups
respectively.Fig. 4Frequency distribution for hscTnT levels in Non-Competition Horses and Racing-ThoroughbredsBreed, diurnal and intra-
individual variation in Non-Competition Horse populationThe assay did not have sufficient sensitivity to assess between breed, diurnal
effect and between-day variation in Non-Competition Horses partly due to low levels of hscTnT (43.2 % of this reference population had
average values ≤ 3 ng/L) (Fig. 4). Reference interval determination of two subset populationsHscTnT levels were different between the Non-
Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds (p < 0.0001) (Table 1). As such, the populations have been considered separately with respect to
upper reference limits. The upper 95th (90 % CI) and 99th percentile of the population distribution in Non-Competitive Horses (N = 125) is
6.8 (90 % CI:6.0–12.0) and 16.2 ng/L and for Racing-Thoroughbreds (N = 178) is 14.0 (90 % CI:10.0–18.0) and 23.2 ng/L, respectively (Table 1
and Fig. 4). Lower reference limits are not clinically relevant and are defined by the LoQ of the assay (3 ng/L). 90 % CI could not be
calculated for the 99th percentile due N value restrictions . Measureable hscTn analyte levels were obtained in 56.8 and 88.8 % for Non-
Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds groups respectively.Fig. 4Frequency distribution for hscTnT levels in Non-Competition Horses and
Racing-Thoroughbreds HscTnT levels were different between the Non-Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds (p < 0.0001) (Table 1). As
such, the populations have been considered separately with respect to upper reference limits. The upper 95th (90 % CI) and 99th percentile
of the population distribution in Non-Competitive Horses (N = 125) is 6.8 (90 % CI:6.0–12.0) and 16.2 ng/L and for Racing-Thoroughbreds
(N = 178) is 14.0 (90 % CI:10.0–18.0) and 23.2 ng/L, respectively (Table 1 and Fig. 4). Lower reference limits are not clinically relevant
and are defined by the LoQ of the assay (3 ng/L). 90 % CI could not be calculated for the 99th percentile due N value restrictions .
Measureable hscTn analyte levels were obtained in 56.8 and 88.8 % for Non-Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds groups
respectively.Fig. 4Frequency distribution for hscTnT levels in Non-Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds Frequency distribution for
hscTnT levels in Non-Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds Breed, diurnal and intra-individual variation in Non-Competition Horse
populationThe assay did not have sufficient sensitivity to assess between breed, diurnal effect and between-day variation in Non-Competition
Horses partly due to low levels of hscTnT (43.2 % of this reference population had average values ≤ 3 ng/L) (Fig. 4). The assay did not have
sufficient sensitivity to assess between breed, diurnal effect and between-day variation in Non-Competition Horses partly due to low levels
of hscTnT (43.2 % of this reference population had average values ≤ 3 ng/L) (Fig. 4). Two selected case studies demonstrating clinical use
of hscTnT assayCase oneThe 11 year old TB Chuckwagon horse had previously passed a veterinary physical and lameness examination on the
morning of the race. The gelding finished the 0.5 mile race in distress and presented immediately for assessment. Examination showed
cyanotic mucous membranes and persistent tachycardia (heart rate: 180 bpm). No cardiac murmurs were noted on auscultation. Ventricular
tachycardia was confirmed on ECG that converted to atrial fibrillation within 30 min and spontaneously returned to sinus rhythm with
supportive therapy, but no conversion treatment, within 12 h. The plasma sample taken 5 h after the race for hscTnT had a value of 221 ng/L;
by 72 h the hscTnT value was 21 ng/L. Five weeks later, a standing and over-the-ground dynamic endoscopy during exercise revealed a
subepiglottic cyst with a severe retroversion of the epiglottis during maximal effort.Case twoThe 14 year old QH mare was diagnosed with
Potomac Horse Fever, and SIRS (based on tachycardia, fever, abnormal WBC count, as well as severe elevations in lactate and toxic, tacky
mucous membranes) . On admission the mare had severe electrolyte imbalances, endotoxemia (toxic neutrophils noted), acute renal failure, and
liver impairments (Table 3). Despite emergency symptomatic treatment she remained unstable and showed deterioration in cardiovascular status
(development of severe bradyarrhythmia with intermittent long sinusal pauses for up to 40 s, pale mucous membranes, and weak pulses), as
well as ongoing severe diarrhea. A plasma sample taken for hscTnT 41 h following initial presentation measured 5723 ng/L. The mare was
euthanized 44 h after initial presentation and post mortem findings included a moderately enlarged heart, failure of left ventricle to
contract completely after rigor mortis, multifocal myocardial necrosis, and congestion of the liver all suggestive of myocardial function
impairment.Table 3Case two selected laboratory resultsTime ofadmission36 hPost-adm.COMPLETE BLOOD COUNTRBC (x 1012/L) 10.95.7Hct (%)
4422.7WBC (x 1012/L) 13.67.1NEU (x 1012/L) 10.25.6LYM (x 1012/L) 2.41.1MONO (x 1012/L) 1.00.4EOS (x 1012/L) 00BASO (x 1012/L) 0.020.01PLT
(K/μL) 238196Fibrinogen Manual (g/L)75CHEMISTRYUREA (mmol/L) > 46.440.6CREA (μmol/L) Too high to reportToo high to reportCA (mmol/L)
2.12.7Total Protein (g/L) 7749ALB (g/L) 2918GLOB (g/L) 4831AST (U/L) 410442ALKP (U/L) 195134GGT (U/L) 1720TBIL (μmol/L) 2520CK (U/L)
505361LDH (U/L) 16942058Na (mmol/L) 104147K (mmol/L) 2.32.4Cl (mmol/L) 79116HscTnT (ng/L)5723BLOOD GASVenousArterialpH (7.35–7.45)7.37.3pCO2
(mmHg) 40.438.4PO2 (mmHg)4861HCO3 (mmol/L) 1818.9 T CO2 (mmol/L) 1920Base Excess [−5 to +5]−9−8sO2 (%)7789Lactate (mmol/L)
3.00.9URINEUSG1.009Fraction of Excretion–Na (%)40Fraction of Excretion–Cl (%)68Fraction of Excretion–K (%)157Selected laboratory results for
Case two, a 14 year old QH mare diagnosed with Potomac Horse Fever, and subsequent myocardial damage Case oneThe 11 year old TB Chuckwagon
horse had previously passed a veterinary physical and lameness examination on the morning of the race. The gelding finished the 0.5 mile
race in distress and presented immediately for assessment. Examination showed cyanotic mucous membranes and persistent tachycardia (heart
rate: 180 bpm). No cardiac murmurs were noted on auscultation. Ventricular tachycardia was confirmed on ECG that converted to atrial
fibrillation within 30 min and spontaneously returned to sinus rhythm with supportive therapy, but no conversion treatment, within 12 h. The
plasma sample taken 5 h after the race for hscTnT had a value of 221 ng/L; by 72 h the hscTnT value was 21 ng/L. Five weeks later, a
standing and over-the-ground dynamic endoscopy during exercise revealed a subepiglottic cyst with a severe retroversion of the epiglottis
during maximal effort. The 11 year old TB Chuckwagon horse had previously passed a veterinary physical and lameness examination on the
morning of the race. The gelding finished the 0.5 mile race in distress and presented immediately for assessment. Examination showed
cyanotic mucous membranes and persistent tachycardia (heart rate: 180 bpm). No cardiac murmurs were noted on auscultation. Ventricular
tachycardia was confirmed on ECG that converted to atrial fibrillation within 30 min and spontaneously returned to sinus rhythm with
supportive therapy, but no conversion treatment, within 12 h. The plasma sample taken 5 h after the race for hscTnT had a value of 221 ng/L;
by 72 h the hscTnT value was 21 ng/L. Five weeks later, a standing and over-the-ground dynamic endoscopy during exercise revealed a
subepiglottic cyst with a severe retroversion of the epiglottis during maximal effort. Case twoThe 14 year old QH mare was diagnosed with
Potomac Horse Fever, and SIRS (based on tachycardia, fever, abnormal WBC count, as well as severe elevations in lactate and toxic, tacky
mucous membranes) . On admission the mare had severe electrolyte imbalances, endotoxemia (toxic neutrophils noted), acute renal failure, and
liver impairments (Table 3). Despite emergency symptomatic treatment she remained unstable and showed deterioration in cardiovascular status
(development of severe bradyarrhythmia with intermittent long sinusal pauses for up to 40 s, pale mucous membranes, and weak pulses), as
well as ongoing severe diarrhea. A plasma sample taken for hscTnT 41 h following initial presentation measured 5723 ng/L. The mare was
euthanized 44 h after initial presentation and post mortem findings included a moderately enlarged heart, failure of left ventricle to
contract completely after rigor mortis, multifocal myocardial necrosis, and congestion of the liver all suggestive of myocardial function
impairment.Table 3Case two selected laboratory resultsTime ofadmission36 hPost-adm.COMPLETE BLOOD COUNTRBC (x 1012/L) 10.95.7Hct (%)
4422.7WBC (x 1012/L) 13.67.1NEU (x 1012/L) 10.25.6LYM (x 1012/L) 2.41.1MONO (x 1012/L) 1.00.4EOS (x 1012/L) 00BASO (x 1012/L) 0.020.01PLT
(K/μL) 238196Fibrinogen Manual (g/L)75CHEMISTRYUREA (mmol/L) > 46.440.6CREA (μmol/L) Too high to reportToo high to reportCA (mmol/L)
2.12.7Total Protein (g/L) 7749ALB (g/L) 2918GLOB (g/L) 4831AST (U/L) 410442ALKP (U/L) 195134GGT (U/L) 1720TBIL (μmol/L) 2520CK (U/L)
505361LDH (U/L) 16942058Na (mmol/L) 104147K (mmol/L) 2.32.4Cl (mmol/L) 79116HscTnT (ng/L)5723BLOOD GASVenousArterialpH (7.35–7.45)7.37.3pCO2
(mmHg) 40.438.4PO2 (mmHg)4861HCO3 (mmol/L) 1818.9 T CO2 (mmol/L) 1920Base Excess [−5 to +5]−9−8sO2 (%)7789Lactate (mmol/L)
3.00.9URINEUSG1.009Fraction of Excretion–Na (%)40Fraction of Excretion–Cl (%)68Fraction of Excretion–K (%)157Selected laboratory results for
Case two, a 14 year old QH mare diagnosed with Potomac Horse Fever, and subsequent myocardial damage The 14 year old QH mare was diagnosed
with Potomac Horse Fever, and SIRS (based on tachycardia, fever, abnormal WBC count, as well as severe elevations in lactate and toxic,
tacky mucous membranes) . On admission the mare had severe electrolyte imbalances, endotoxemia (toxic neutrophils noted), acute renal
failure, and liver impairments (Table 3). Despite emergency symptomatic treatment she remained unstable and showed deterioration in
cardiovascular status (development of severe bradyarrhythmia with intermittent long sinusal pauses for up to 40 s, pale mucous membranes,
and weak pulses), as well as ongoing severe diarrhea. A plasma sample taken for hscTnT 41 h following initial presentation measured
5723 ng/L. The mare was euthanized 44 h after initial presentation and post mortem findings included a moderately enlarged heart, failure of
left ventricle to contract completely after rigor mortis, multifocal myocardial necrosis, and congestion of the liver all suggestive of
myocardial function impairment.Table 3Case two selected laboratory resultsTime ofadmission36 hPost-adm.COMPLETE BLOOD COUNTRBC (x 1012/L)
10.95.7Hct (%) 4422.7WBC (x 1012/L) 13.67.1NEU (x 1012/L) 10.25.6LYM (x 1012/L) 2.41.1MONO (x 1012/L) 1.00.4EOS (x 1012/L) 00BASO (x 1012/L)
0.020.01PLT (K/μL) 238196Fibrinogen Manual (g/L)75CHEMISTRYUREA (mmol/L) > 46.440.6CREA (μmol/L) Too high to reportToo high to reportCA
(mmol/L) 2.12.7Total Protein (g/L) 7749ALB (g/L) 2918GLOB (g/L) 4831AST (U/L) 410442ALKP (U/L) 195134GGT (U/L) 1720TBIL (μmol/L) 2520CK
(U/L) 505361LDH (U/L) 16942058Na (mmol/L) 104147K (mmol/L) 2.32.4Cl (mmol/L) 79116HscTnT (ng/L)5723BLOOD GASVenousArterialpH
(7.35–7.45)7.37.3pCO2 (mmHg) 40.438.4PO2 (mmHg)4861HCO3 (mmol/L) 1818.9 T CO2 (mmol/L) 1920Base Excess [−5 to +5]−9−8sO2 (%)7789Lactate
(mmol/L) 3.00.9URINEUSG1.009Fraction of Excretion–Na (%)40Fraction of Excretion–Cl (%)68Fraction of Excretion–K (%)157Selected laboratory
results for Case two, a 14 year old QH mare diagnosed with Potomac Horse Fever, and subsequent myocardial damage Case two selected
laboratory results Selected laboratory results for Case two, a 14 year old QH mare diagnosed with Potomac Horse Fever, and subsequent
myocardial damage Adhering to the ASVCP guidelines based largely on the strict CLSI guidelines, our results indicate that the Roche
Diagnostics cTnT assay (on the Cobas-e601 analyzer) can not only appropriately and adequately measure plasma concentrations of equine cTnT,
but it can be classified as a’high-sensitivity’ immunoassay fit for diagnostic use in horses. Meeting the CLSI guidelines, our study defined
the reference intervals and determined the upper 95th (90 % CI) and 99th percentile of the population distribution in Non-Competitive Horses
(N = 125) is 6.8 (90 % CI: 6.0–12.0) and 16.2 ng/L and for Racing-Thoroughbreds (N = 178) is 14.0 (90 % CI: 10.0–18.0) and 23.2 ng/L,
respectively (Table 1, Fig. 4). This study provides additional information key to interpreting hscTnT results in clinical context as
compared with recent reports [6, 7]. The epitopes detected by this hscTnT assay were conserved between humans and horses with 100 % homology
detected when comparing human adult cTnTand equine cTnT (Fig. 1). Utilizing a series of validation experiments according to industry
guidelines, the assay was challenged with detecting and measuring equine cTnT [15, 16]. Homogenates of equine cardiac and skeletal muscle
allowed for the determination of specificity of the assay for hscTnT in cardiac versus skeletal muscle. Cross-reactivity with the skeletal
muscle isoform of Troponin-T was minimal, indicating excellent assay specificity for the cardiac isoform. Purified equine cardiac troponin
obtained from harvested equine myocardium allowed for the determination of linearity explored to levels exceeding the expected upper limit
of the assay according to ASVCP guidelines (up to 3526.7 ng/L) . This method differed from that used in the Van Der Vekens study (in which
diluted pooled samples from clinical cases were used to assess linearity up to 1098. 8 ng/L) and allowed assessment of assay linearity at
higher analyte levels. Linearity of the assay in our study was assessed by linear and polynomial regression of the data and difference plot
with Total Error criteria, whereas the Van Der Vekens group used simple linear regression analysis. Our work demonstrated good assay
linearity over the low range of cTnT concentrations, but slightly over-recovers at high levels. However, 391 ng/L is > 10 times our defined
URLs, so linearity to this level should confer good diagnostic sensitivity for distinguishing sick from healthy populations. For an accurate
quantitative determination for clinical purposes it is therefore recommended to dilute specimens > 391 ng/L into the linear range for future
studies. No such dilutions were performed on any clinical samples utilized throughout this study. The within-run and between-run precision
values were similar to those reported for measurement of human cTnT and were within CLSI standards . In humans this assay has complied with
the standards set forth by the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine to be defined as a’high-sensitivity’
assay . Based on the same stringent criteria, our study shows that this assay can be classified as a ‘high-sensitivity’ assay appropriate
for diagnostic use in horses. Specifically we showed that the total imprecision was ≤ 10 % at the 99th percentiles for our two reference
populations (16.22 and 23.21 ng/L), and measureable cTn analyte levels were obtained in 56.8 and 88.8 % for Non-Competition Horses and
Racing-Thoroughbreds groups respectively. It is critical for clinicians to understand certain basic characteristics of assays, development
of reference intervals, and establishment of decision thresholds in order to critically interpret troponin assay use reported in the equine
literature, and to successfully apply the assays available for use in practice. The limit of quantitation (LoQ) is the concentration above
which quantitative results may be obtained with a specific degree of confidence (ie.CV ≤ 10 %), and according to the CLSI guidelines is
recommended over the limit of detection (LoD) for setting the lower reporting limits of a test for clinical use. Importantly, only
concentrations exceeding an assay’s LoQ should be reported as a numerical value. The LoQ can, for example, be significantly greater than the
LoD, as is reported in human plasma (LoD =3 ng/L, but LoQ = 13.5 ng/L) . All equine studies to date using cardiac troponins mainly report
values above manufacturers’ defined LoDs, without verifying [6, 7, 9, 10], or adhering to a determined functional sensitivity (LoQ) . The
LoQ that we determined for equine plasma using Roche’s hscTnT assay was validated at 3 ng/L (10 % CV). It is possible that the true LoQ may
be at a level lower than 3 ng/L, but because the manufacturer limits all reported values to 3 ng/L, lower levels could not be validated.
Additionally, the 10 % CV at 3 ng/L which is lower than what was observed in within-run precision Level 1 (14.9 % at 6.5 ng/L) may indicate
that at 3 ng/L the assay is approaching non-linear dose response. Nevertheless, our results imply that any Roche hscTnT assay value reported
by the e601-Cobas instrument is reliable for use in horse plasma. The hscTnT assay reported values < 3 ng/L in 43.2 and 11.2 % of the Non-
Competition Horses and Racing-Thoroughbreds, respectively, which is similar to the validation study in heathy humans (20.1 % at < 3 ng/L) .
This limited the determination of biological variation, measured as intra-individual, inter-individual variation (between-breed), reference
change values (RCVs), and the index of individuality values. The ability of this assay to function at these low concentrations (LoQ level)
is unique when compared to the only cTnI assay similarly validated appropriately by ASVCP and CLSI standards for use in horses , and thus
continues to show promise for its’ ability to detect myocardial dysfunction as well as the response of equine myocardium to various exercise
regimes. Comparison of hscTnT analyte levels (measured on the Roche Diagnostics hscTnT assay) and cTnI analyte levels (measured on the the
iSTAT4) in purified equine cardiac troponin samples, using a Deming regression, showed excellent correlation. Of note, a Blant-Altman graph
represents a bias plot and was not used to compare the two assays as the numerical value of any bias between hsTnT and cTnI is not
clinically interpretable when comparing the relative recoveries of these two entirely different molecules. As human laboratories trend
toward only using’high-sensitivity’ troponin assays, the manufacturing of older generation assays may discontinue. While troponin assays’
use continues to grow in veterinary fields clinicians must be aware that “all troponin assays are NOT created equal” . In the thorough
review by Rossi et al. the use of troponin I assays in horses, as well as their associated limitations and challenges, are highlighted . The
analysis and standardization for cTnT is beneficially more straightforward than for cTnI. All assays for cTnT are marketed by one
manufacturer1, and instruments are calibrated to the same reference material. It has been demonstrated that Roche’s cTnT immunoassay detects
binary (cTnT-I and cTnT-C), ternary complexes (cTnT-I-C) of troponin, and the free-cTnT form, as well as capably measures cTnT degradation
by-products and phosphorylated-cTnT in circulation . Therefore, cTnT degradation does not affect harmonization between different assays as
previously reported for the cTnI assays . The effect of EDTA in the cTnT assay seems to be minimal, whereas differences between serum and
plasma values have been reported for a number of cTnI methods . In human patient samples, cTnT appears to be very stable at room
temperature, 4 °C, and when repeatedly frozen and thawed . Similarly our study demonstrated excellent stability of equine samples frozen,
stored, and then thawed over various time periods. A goal for any assay is to establish decision thresholds to distinguish among different
groups. In human medicine, an algorithm has been agreed upon to differentiate healthy individuals from those suffering an AMI that includes
the use of cTn assays but importantly includes other criteria such as presence of clinical signs, and other diagnostic imaging findings.
Furthermore it recommends obtaining individuals’ cTn levels at a second time point to increase the specificity of the assay and promotes the
use a delta cut-off instead of single diagnostic cut-off value . Other factors, such as exercise exposure, must be considered when
interpreting the results of individual hscTnT analyte levels. This will be particularly relevant when this assay is to be used on
performance horses, and thereby warrants further study into the kinetics of hscTnT in the exercising horse. Utilizing the ROC curve method,
a calculated hscTnT 6.6 ng/L cut-off point for distinguishing healthy horses from those with primary myocardial disease has been recently
published using the same Roche hscTnT assay . Applying this cut-off point to our two defined reference populations would imply 5 % of the
Non-Competition, and 22 % of the Racing-Thoroughbreds would be classified as having primary myocardial disease. This interpretation is
unlikely, and indicates caution must be used when applying this cut-off point to various horse populations. The discrepancy may be partly
explained by the inclusion of only 20 healthy horses in the reference population described by Van Der Vekens et al. , as compared to our
N = 125 Non-Competition and N = 178 Racing-Thoroughbred reference populations. Including a minimum of 120 horses in each of our groups
provided populations for which reference intervals could be defined by statistical methods in compliance with ASCVP guidelines and provide
better whole population normal hscTnT level estimations. The use of only 20 horses in the reference population used by Van Der Vekens et.
al. led to a “tight” reference range, and significant overlap between their normal group and those classified with primary myocardial
disease. Their low cut-off point was necessary to maintain acceptable sensitivity of the assay, enabling it to distinguish between their two
groups, but is at the expense of possibly misclassifying an unacceptably high number of healthy horses as diseased. Their healthy horse
group is most likely more similar to our Non-Competition group of horses (than our Racing-Thoroughbred group), but the authors did not
describe the use or fitness status of the members of this group in which 10/35 were Trotters that may have been in training or racing.
Regardless, a hscTnT 6.6 ng/L cut-off point differentiating healthy from those with primary myocardial is likely more appropriately applied
to relatively sedentary horses rather than racing populations. Future studies may be warranted to determine cardiac troponin cut-off points
specific to racing horses. The inclusion of only two case studies in our study is few, but nevertheless demonstrate applications of the
hscTnT assay unique to those recently presented . In case one we report an adult Thoroughbred racing gelding that presented for near
collapse event, distress, clinical signs of hypoxia (cyanosis), cardiac abnormalities identified on auscultation and ECG, and subsequently
abnormally high levels of hscTnT. The later over-the-ground dynamic endoscopic confirmation of severe epiglottic retroversion with a
subepiglottic cyst and dorsal displacement of the soft palate suggests a possible association between the clinical presentation of impaired
gas exchange and cardiac function as documented by elevations in the myocardial biomarker hscTnT. We do however acknowledge that a cardiac
ultrasonographic assessment is missing, which limited the full characterization of his cardiac status and the ability to determine the
complete etiology of his presentation. The elevated value detected 72 h later demonstrates persistence of the biomarker cTnT further
emphasizing its clinical utility, as the practitioner can take samples at time points slightly past onset of acute condition without missing
the opportunity to detect myocardial insult. Case two demonstrates a severe, multi-organ system dysfunction likely related to SIRS and
endotoxemia associated with Potomac horse fever. Increases in cardiac troponin have been previously reported in experimentally-induced
endotoxemia . The diagnosis of myocardial function impairment in this case was based on clinical presentation, ECG monitoring, hscTnT
levels, and post-mortem evaluation but may have been strengthened by completion of cardiac ultrasonography. Case two exemplifies the level
to which hscTnT may be seen clinically (5723 ng/L in this case as compared to the highest level of 1341 ng/L recorded by the Van de Vekens
group in a horse with primary myocardial disease) . Despite the fact that our linearity experiment showed the assay has slight over-recovery
of the hscTnT analyte > 391 ng/L value, tracking the trend over time in severely elevated values in cases such as this would be of interest
to the clinician with respect to case management and prognosis . Additional limitations of our study include the abbreviated resting-ECG
(2 min) on all horses included in the two reference populations, as well as the absence of cardiac ultrasonography. These methods reflect
field-study condition constraints. More thorough screening may have further identified individuals that were inappropriate for study
inclusion as “healthy horses”. Our total samples numbers included, and the absence of significant outliers suggest however that the
reference populations appropriately reflect more generalized healthy populations. In conclusion, this report has validated, according to the
rigorous recommendations of the CLSI, the only’high-sensitivity’ troponin assay (Roche hscTnT, Cobas-e601) for use in horses. The current
literature is lacking many of the validation experiments conducted in our study, and thus the data published here significantly adds to the
conclusions of Van der Vekens et al. [6, 20]. In our study reference intervals for the hscTn-T assay in healthy adult Non-Competition and
Racing Thoroughbred horses were established, as were assay performance characteristics, and sample collection protocols in equine plasma
samples. While the assay remains insufficiently sensitive to provide biological variation information in mainly sedentary healthy horses at
this time, it will prove extremely useful for assessment of subtle myocardial injury as well as the effects of exercise on equine
myocardium. AMI, acute myocardial injury; ASVCP, American Society of Veterinary Clinical Pathology; Bpm, beats per minute; CI, confidence
interval; CLSI, Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute; cTn-I, cardiac Troponin-I; cTnT, cardiac Troponin-T; CV, coefficient of
variation; ECG, electrocardiogram; EDTA, Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; hscTnT, high-sensitivity cardiac Troponin-T; L1, level 1; L2,
level 2; L3, level 3; LoD, limit of detection; LoQ, limit of quantitation; NACB, National Academy of Clinical Biochemistry; PCR, polymerase
chain reaction; RCVs, reference change values; ROC, receiver operating characteristic; SIRS, systemic inflammatory response syndrome; URL,
upper reference limit; WBC, white blood cell. Cobas-e601, Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN. Elecsys diluent multi-assay, Roche
Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN. Televet-100, Engel Engineering, Offenbach, Germany. iSTAT-2, Heska Corp, Loveland, CO. Troponin-T hs, Roche
Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN. The authors thank contributing owners and Glennis Doiron and the CLS collaborators for technical assistance.
Funded by the University of Calgary, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Clinical Research Fund. All the data supporting the findings reported
is contained within the manuscript. ES carried out the study design, data collection, data analysis, and drafting of the manuscript. SM
contributed to data collection and data analysis. SP participated in data collection. IL and RL carried out the design of the study, data
analysis and drafting of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. ES: HBSc., DC, DVM, ACVMR (Sports Medicine and
Rehabilitation)—Equine Resident UCVM/Moore Equine Veterinary Centre, IL: PhD, DCC, FCACB, DABCC—Clinical Assistant Professor, Clinical
Biochemist, CLS. Program Director, Clinical Biochemistry Fellowship Program. Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine. RL: MSc., PhD,
DMV, Dipl. ACVIM, Dipl. ACVSMR (Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation)—Associate Professor UCVM. The authors declare that they have no
competing interest. Not applicable. Ethics and consent form approved by the University of Calgary, Veterinary Sciences Animal Care
Committee: Protocol #AC12-0049. Consent obtained from animals’ owners for participation.
