Interscalene brachial plexus block provides effective anesthesia and analgesia for shoulder surgery. One of the disadvantages of this
technique is the risk of hemidiaphragmatic paresis, which can occur as a result of phrenic nerve block and can cause a decrease in the
pulmonary function, limiting the use of the block in patients with reduced functional residual capacity or a preexisting pulmonary disease.
However, it is generally transient and is resolved over the duration of the local anesthetic's action. We present a case of a patient who
experienced prolonged hemidiaphragmatic paresis following a continuous interscalene brachial plexus block for the postoperative pain
management of shoulder surgery, and suggest a mechanism that may have led to this adverse effect. Nerve injuries associated with peripheral
nerve blocks may be caused by several mechanisms. Our findings suggest that perioperative nerve injuries can occur as a result of combined
mechanical and chemical injuries. Shoulder surgery usually results in moderate to severe postoperative pain that can impair early recovery
and rehabilitation. Single-injection or continuous interscalene brachial plexus block (ISB) provides effective anesthesia and analgesia for
shoulder surgery. However, one of the disadvantages of this technique is the risk of hemidiaphragmatic paresis (HDP) as a result of
ipsilateral phrenic nerve blocks and the potential decrease in the pulmonary function, which may limit the use of the technique in patients
with reduced functional residual capacity or a preexisting pulmonary disease. It may also be a serious concern for ambulatory patients.
However, this type of paresis is generally transient and is resolved over the duration of the local anesthetic's action. We report an
unusual case of prolonged HDP following continuous ISB for shoulder surgery that was almost fully recovered after 15 months. This report
discusses the etiology and mechanism of this rare perioperative nerve injury. A 71-year-old woman of American Society of Anesthesiologists
physical status II was scheduled for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair of the right shoulder under ISB. Her only remarkable medical history
was hypertension treated with carvedilol 12.5 mg, PO daily. She had no history of cervical spine or lung disease and no preexisting
neurologic deficits. The preoperative laboratory evaluations – including her chest radiograph (Fig. 1) – were unremarkable. Preoperative
chest X-ray. After applying standard monitoring, fentanyl 50 μg was administered to produce a state of conscious sedation. No superficial
cervical plexus block was performed for shoulder analgesia. A right continuous ISB was performed using a similar technique to the one
described before. Following skin disinfection, a skin wheal with 3 mL of 2% lidocaine was raised to the needle entry point. A nerve
stimulator (Stimuplex-DIG, B/Braun, Melsungen, Germany) connected to a 50 mm insulated Contiplex A needle and cannula (Contiplex A; B/Braun)
were used with the following initial settings: frequency = 1 Hz, stimulus duration = 0.2 ms, and current = 1.5 mA. On the 1st pass, we
noticed hiccups from diaphragm contractions, and the needle was redirected laterally and posteriorly. On the 2nd pass, a contraction of the
biceps muscle was observed under a current output of 0.5 mA. During the introduction of the cannula, the patient reported a brief
paresthesia of the shoulder area that was quickly resolved. A few seconds later, as the paresthesia had rapidly disappeared, a 20-gauge end-
hole catheter was inserted caudally by 8 cm through the cannula into the plexus sheath without dysesthesia or pain. Subsequently, 30 mL of
0.5% ropivacaine were slowly injected through the catheter after careful intermittent aspirations. Thirty minutes after the initial bolus,
the patient exhibited a sensory and motor blockade without any subjective increase in breathing efforts. The catheter was then tunneled
subcutaneously by 3 to 4 cm through an 18-gauge IV needle and was fixed to the skin with a tight suture. The patient was placed in the beach
chair for the surgery. Her head was firmly fixed in the neutral position with a strap. A propofol infusion was administered intraoperatively
for sedation. The 195 minutes of surgery was uneventful. In the recovery room, a 0.2% ropivacaine infusion was administered through the
catheter at a rate of 6 mL/hour with a 3-mL bolus and a lockout of 20 minutes. The patient showed excellent analgesia and required no
supplemental analgesics. By the following afternoon (30 hours after the initial block), the catheter was inadvertently dislodged. The
patient's shoulder became progressively painful, and she requested that the interscalene catheter be reinserted. A 2nd continuous ISB was
performed using the same technique as before, except that 20 mL of 0.2% ropivacaine were used for the analgesia this time. No phrenic nerve
stimulation, pain, dysesthesia, or paresthesia occurred during the procedure. The patient underwent a routine chest radiograph to exclude
the presence of a pneumothorax. The chest radiograph revealed an elevated ipsilateral hemidiaphragm with no other findings. At that time,
there were no breathing problems reported. The local anesthetic infusion was discontinued on postoperative day 4. The catheter was removed
without difficulty. There were no bruises, swelling, or infection at the insertion site. No neurologic deficits were noted in the patient's
right upper extremity, and she was discharged on the 5th postoperative day. At the 2nd follow-up, approximately 3 months later, the patient
complained of mild dyspnea, particularly upon bending of the spine. She was referred to a pulmonologist for further evaluation. The repeat
chest radiograph reaffirmed an elevated right hemidiaphragm with a basal atelectasis and pleural effusion (Fig. 2). The pulmonary function
tests showed a restrictive lung disease: the forced vital capacity, forced expiratory volume in 1 second, and peak expiratory flow were
respectively reduced to 62%, 60%, and 69%. The bronchoscopy showed no abnormal findings. The thoracic computed tomography confirmed an
elevation of the right diaphragm and collapses of the right lower lobe without any bronchial obstruction lesion. The patient was examined by
the anesthesiologist. Unfortunately, no formal neurology consultation or neurophysiological studies were performed at that time. Chest X-ray
at 3 months showing an elevation of the right hemidiaphragm associated with basal atelectasis of the right lower lobe and pleural effusion.
Approximately 7 months later, the patient exhibited no further respiratory symptoms. She did not experience any interference in her normal
daily activities from the HDP. The follow-up chest radiograph showed a mild improvement of the right lower lobe atelectasis. In the final
follow-up, almost 15 months postoperatively, the chest radiograph had completely returned to the baseline (Fig. 3). Chest X-ray at 15 months
postoperatively showing fully expanded lungs. HDP from ipsilateral phrenic nerve block is a well-known side effect of ISB. When using the
single-injection technique, ISB is associated with a 100% incidence of HDP, which can result in a 25% to 32% reduction in the spirometric
measures of the pulmonary function. This side effect is not considered to be worrying unless the patient experiences a severe respiratory
compromise or coincident contralateral phrenic nerve paresis. Patients undergoing continuous ISB are also at risk of HDP. Although HDP is
usually transient, rare cases of prolonged or persistent HDP after single-injection or continuous ISB have been reported. The incidence of
persistent HDP following ISB for shoulder surgery is of 1 per 2069 (0.048%). Transient HDP following ISB is presumably due to the ventral
spread of the local anesthetic to the phrenic nerve, or the cephalad spread to the C3–5 roots of the cervical plexus. Therefore, it is
usually resolved with the resolution of the anesthetic block. By contrast, the exact mechanisms of prolonged or persistent HDP remain
unknown. Neurologic injuries can be caused by patient-, block-, or surgery-related factors, or a combination of those. The potential factors
include diabetes mellitus, pre-existing neurologic disorders, being of the male gender, direct mechanical trauma, local anesthetic
neurotoxicity, an ischemic injury, nerve compression from hematoma, and patient positioning or manipulation during the surgery. They may
occur either alone or in combination. A recent study reported that symptomatic cervical spine disease was a risk factor of persistent HDP
following ISB. In our case, the mechanism of the nerve injury was uncertain and probably multifactorial. The patient had no history of
cervical spine disease or chiropractic manipulation. Although traction injuries on the operated extremity may occur during surgical
procedures, they are primarily associated with the lateral decubitus position. In addition, the head was fixed firmly in the neutral
position throughout the surgical procedure. Therefore, it is unlikely that the paresis was caused by the surgery or patient positioning in
this case. Given the course of the events, it is more likely that the paresis was caused by the continuous ISB. Our patient reported
paresthesia in the operated shoulder during the cannula insertion. Although mechanical contact with the brachial plexus generally results in
shoulder paresthesia, it can also be caused by the stimulation of the phrenic nerve. Therefore, the insertion of the cannula may have been
one of the factors that contributed to the nerve injury in this case. However, it is unknown whether the elicitation of paresthesia
increases the risk of nerve injuries. The presence of an indwelling catheter might be a factor of nerve injuries. Indeed, it is possible
that it causes fibrosis around the nervous tissue. A recent study suggested that inflammation played a significant role in the mechanism of
persistent HDP. The study reported intraoperative findings of adhesions, fascial thickening, and vascular changes secondary to inflammation
during phrenic nerve surgery. However, although inflammation might play a crucial role in the mechanism of nerve injuries, it is unclear
whether this results from the catheter or from other factors. With regard to the phrenic nerve injury in the present case, the potential
chemical toxicity of the local anesthetics must be considered. Although local anesthetics are generally safe when administered correctly and
in the recommended concentrations, they can produce nerve injuries, particularly in the event of inappropriately high concentrations,
intraneural injections, or a prolonged exposure duration. In the present case, ropivacaine 0.2% was infused continuously for several days.
Therefore, the neurotoxicity of the local anesthetics might also have contributed to the paresis, although ropivacaine seems to present the
least potential for neurotoxicity of all available local anesthetics. In this case, the brachial plexus was located through electrical
stimulation. We did not use ultrasound, as we did not have the necessary equipment at the time. The advantages of ultrasound-guided nerve
blocks include the real-time visualization of the needle placement and avoidance of needle trauma. Although this might theoretically reduce
the incidence of neurologic complications, there is no evidence that ultrasound guidance reduces the incidence of neurologic complications
as compared with other techniques. In addition, permanent phrenic nerve injuries can occur despite the use of ultrasound. This suggests that
direct mechanical trauma is not the main contributor to nerve injury. The degree to which a nerve is damaged has implications for its
function and potential recovery. Considering the clinical pathway in this case, the injury was more likely to represent neurapraxia or a
mild degree of axonotmesis. Unfortunately, neurophysiological testing was not performed in this case. Neurophysiological testing is helpful
to determine the basis of any clinical deficit, localize the site of the lesion, and define its severity and prognosis. Although
neurophysiological testing does not indicate the etiology of the nerve injury, it may help to distinguish between various possibilities. The
timing of the neurophysiologic studies is important in order to obtain an accurate diagnosis. Although the process of nerve degeneration may
take 14 days or more, earlier testing is indicated to rule out preexisting neuropathies. This case report suggests that prolonged HDP can
occur as a result of combined mechanical and chemical injuries following continuous ISB. A complete remission of the symptoms occurred
spontaneously after 15 months. More research is needed on the exact mechanisms of nerve injuries following nerve blockades, and the methods
to prevent them. Abbreviations: HDP = hemidiaphragmatic paresis, ISB = interscalene brachial plexus block. Ethical approval and patient's
consent: Since this is a case report, institutional review board approval is not sought; however, written consent for publication was
obtained from the patient. Funding: This work was supported by Inha University Hospital Research Grant. The authors have no conflicts of
interest to disclose.
