We present a case of a 62‐year‐old diabetic woman with acute pyelonephritis and spondylitis caused by Salmonella typhi. She was admitted to
Tokyo Medical Dental University Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, because of unconsciousness and was diagnosed with sepsis by retrograde
pyelonephritis as a result of Salmonella typhi. Antibiotics treatment was immediately started; however, she subsequently developed lumbar
spondylitis, and long‐term conservative treatment with antibiotics and a fixing device were required. This is the first report of a diabetic
patient who developed retrograde urinary tract infection with Salmonella typhi, followed by sepsis and spondylitis. The infection could be a
result of diabetic neuropathy, presenting neurogenic bladder and hydronephrosis. The patient was successfully treated with antibiotics and
became asymptomatic with normal inflammatory marker levels, and no clinical sign of recurrence was observed in the kidney and spine at
4 months. J Diabetes Investig 2016; 7: 436–439 Salmonella typhi is a rare cause of urinary tract infection and spondylitis, especially in
non‐endemic areas1. We herein report a unique case of retrograde pyelonephritis of Salmonella typhi as a result of neurogenic bladder caused
by diabetic neuropathy, followed by sepsis and spondylitis without typical typhoid fever. A 62‐year‐old woman, with no history of typhoid
fever and gastrointestinal symptoms, was admitted to Tokyo Medical Dental University Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, because of unconsciousness. Two
months before admission, she experienced frequent urination, thirst and back pain, while her bodyweight had reduced by 12 kg. She had no
history of travelling in endemic areas of Salmonella typhi before admission. She had no contact with any persons diagnosed with the
microorganism. On admission, her blood pressure, pulse rate and body temperature were 125/78 mmHg, 71 b.p.m. and 35.6°C, respectively.
Table 1 shows laboratory data. Her blood glucose concentration was 845 mg/dL, with glycated hemoglobin being 11.5%. She was diagnosed with
diabetes. White blood count (WBC) and C‐reactive protein (CRP) levels were 21,600/μL and 22.5 mg/dL, respectively. Her serum creatinine was
1.25 mg/dL. Urinalysis showed bacteriuria with many WBC casts. She exhibited orthostatic hypotension, reduced ankle reflexes and abnormally
decreased vibration perception to a 128‐Hz tuning fork, and post‐voiding residual urinary volume in the bladder was more than 500 mL,
suggesting diabetic peripheral and autonomic neuropathy. Salmonella typhi was isolated from both the blood and urine, but not from fecal
cultures, although we examined fecal culture twice. Abdominal computed tomography showed hydronephrosis, enlargement and perinephric
stranding of the right kidney; however, neither urolithiasis, a common cause of hydronephrosis as a result of Salmonella typhi, nor
destruction of lumbar spine, which causes neurogenic bladder, were observed (Figure 1). In addition, neither cholelithiasis nor an
abnormality in the biliary tract system were found in the images. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed as acute retrograde pyelonephritis
and sepsis as a result of Salmonella typhi infection. Diabetic neurogenic bladder was likely to contribute to the infection. The antibiotics
sensitive to this microorganism involved third‐generation cephalosporin, carbapenem and quinolone, and because of the complicated sepsis,
the patient was initially treated with meropenem immediately after admission, and maintained the regimen even after Salmonella typhi was
detected in urinary cultures. Laboratory data at admission γ‐GTP, gamma‐glutamyl transpeptidase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST,
aspartate aminotransferase; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CK, creatine kinase; HbA1c, glycated hemoglobin. Abdominal computed tomography on
admission. Antibiotics were immediately given, and strict glycemic control was able to be achieved by multiple daily injection of insulin
with a total dosage of 15 units per day, resulting in robust decreases in WBC and CRP levels (Figure 2); however, the patient's back pain
and low‐grade fever still remained at 4 weeks after admission. In order to investigate the infection focuses other than the right kidney,
abdominal computed tomography, cardiac ultrasonography and lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were carried out. Destruction of the L3
and L4 vertebrae (Figure 3) was observed by lumbar MRI, suggesting that lumbar spondylitis occurred as a result of the hematogenous spread
of Salmonella typhi. Without biopsy of the infected lumber spine, antibiotics treatment and rest were continued, because the patient did not
complain of neurogenic symptoms. There was no fluid retention near the lumbar spine. Inflammatory signs and symptoms disappeared after a
7‐week antibiotics treatment. Meropenem was replaced by cefepime at 8 weeks because of the subsequent leukopenia. She showed a significant
improvement of WBC and CRP levels, and eventually cefepime was changed to oral antibiotics (Figure 2). The patient became asymptomatic with
normal inflammatory marker levels, and no clinical signs of recurrence in the kidney and spine at 4 months (Figure 2). We re‐studied lumbar
MRI 12 weeks after administration of antibiotics, and found that the signal intensity in the T2‐weighted image in the infection sites was
reduced. Clinical course. Lumbar magnetic resonance imaging at 1 month after admission. Salmonella typhi is known to cause typhoid fever,
with gastroenteric symptoms, such as vomiting, diarrhea, low‐grade fever and rose spots2. Its infection is common in underdeveloped
countries, where sanitation is poor, and where there is fecal contamination of food and water. It is sometimes observed in those who live in
non‐endemic areas with a recent history of travelling in endemic areas. The present case is unique in that: (i) retrograde urinary tract
infection (pyelonephritis) of Salmonella typhi occurred in a non‐endemic country, Japan, without known sources of Salmonella infection; (ii)
it could be a result of diabetic neuropathy, presenting neurogenic bladder and hydronephrosis of the right kidney; (iii) the patient had no
prodromal bowel symptoms associated with typhoid fever; and (iv) the patient showed a spread of Salmonella typhi infection to the lumbar
spine. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report of a retrograde infection of Salmonella typhi in the urinary tract system
in a patient with diabetic neurogenic bladder, leading to sepsis and lumbar spondylitis. Neurogenic bladder is one of the serious
complications associated with diabetic autonomic neuropathy, leading to life‐threatening conditions such as acute pyelonephritis and
sepsis3. Those who have neurogenic bladder complain of diminished filling sensation of the bladder and its poor contractility, resulting in
increased post‐voiding residual urinary volume. This condition is exclusively high risk at urinary tract infection including pyelonephritis,
lithiasis and thus renal dysfunction. A previous study showed that Escherichia coli is the most common microorganism in elderly diabetic
patients with acute pyelonephritis, followed by Candida species and Gram‐positive cocci 4. In the present case, we detected Salmonella typhi
from the urine and blood cultures of a type 2 diabetic patient who might have had a long duration of diabetes with severe autonomic
neuropathy. Urinary tract infection with Salmonella typhi is reported in less than 1% of total cases, although the worldwide prevalence of
the infection has been estimated to be 12–33 million cases per year1. A previous review summarized the clinical manifestation of 18 patients
with Salmonella typhi bacteriuria, and found that urolithiasis, bladder abnormality and kidney diseases are often associated with urinary
tract infection with Salmonella typhi; however, the complication of diabetes has not been reported in the literature5. Thus, the presence of
diabetic neuropathy, such as neurogenic bladder, should be evaluated carefully, when diabetic patients are diagnosed with urinary tract
infection by Salmonella typhi. Other than pyelonephritis, iliopsoas muscle abscess and spondylitis could cause back pain in diabetic
patients6, 7. In the present case, spondylitis of the lumbar spine was identified by lumbar MRI. Lumbar vertebrae are the site of
predilection for spondylitis, and a hematogenous spread is reported to be a principal route of the infection8. Spondylitis sometimes occurs
after abdominal or spinal surgery or myelography9. The patient had never received surgery or myelography; thus, spondylitis appeared to be
caused by a hematogenous spread of Salmonella typhi from the right kidney. Salmonella typhi infection of the bone and joint is extremely
rare, as well as that of the urinary tract system1. Treatment of spondylitis primarily includes intravenous administration of antibiotics
and rest using a fixing band. Surgery might be required in patients when antibiotics are not effective or when patients develop
complications, such as neurological deficits. Ceftriaxone or fluoroquinolones are likely to be used for the treatment of Salmonella typhi
10. There was no clinical evidence of neurological deficits, fluid collection and deformity of the lumbar spine in the infection sites. In
conclusion, neurogenic bladder as a result of diabetic autonomic neuropathy could cause hydronephrosis, leading to retrograde urinary tract
infection with Salmonella typhi, followed by sepsis and lumbar spondylitis. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
