We experienced a case of iliopsoas abscess which was markedly recovered after percutaneous and surgical drainage in a subject with poorly
controlled type 2 diabetes. When iliopsoas abscess is suspected, physicians should survey patients by CT scan or MRI and should consider
invasive treatment including surgical drainage. A 77‐year‐old woman who had been suffering from type 2 diabetes for 12 years, which was
poorly controlled (glycated hemoglobin was fluctuating around 9%), complained of left lower quadrant abdominal pain and visited the
hospital. Although she was afebrile, laboratory test showed elevated white blood cells (12,000/μL) and C‐reactive protein (31.68 mg/dL), and
she was hospitalized. On physical examination, small wounds were confirmed on her both elbows, as she fell down and hit her hips several
times a week before the onset of abdominal pain. Wounds were 2–3 cm in diameter and partially wet, which had already become dried scabs in
most parts. Chest and abdominal X‐rays were normal, and there was no significant finding in abdominal ultrasonography. Urinary test was
negative for urinary tract infection. As the patient had a history of Stevens Johnson syndrome after contrast agent use, non‐enhanced
computed tomography (CT) scan was carried out, which showed no specific finding. On the day of admission, cefmetazole (1 g) was given once,
but high‐grade fever over 40°C and shivering developed, suggesting that the patient had become septic. Therefore, we started
tazobactam/piperacillin (4.5 g/every 8 h) and vancomycin (0.5 g/every 12 h). Transthoracic ultracardiogram did not show any sign of
infectious endocarditis. In lumber magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on the fourth day after admission, a high‐intensity area in the left
iliopsoas muscle at the L4/5 level was observed, which led to the diagnosis of iliopsoas abscess (Figure 1a). Methicillin‐sensitive
Staphylococcus aureus was detected in blood culture. Therefore, vancomycin was discontinued. On CT on day 7, the left iliopsoas muscle was
markedly enlarged (Figure 1b). MRI on day 11 showed that the lesion was multiocular (Figure 1c). As white blood cells were elevated to
25,000/μL and did not decrease even after continuous antibiotic treatment, percutaneous drainage under CT guidance was carried out
(Figure 1d). Approximately 8 mL of yellowish pus was aspirated, which was found to be positive for methicillin‐sensitive S. aureus. In
addition, for the complete recovery from such an abscess, the patient underwent surgical drainage on day 15. After then, her general status
was improved, tazobactam/piperacillin was de‐escalated to sulbactam/ampicillin (3 g/every 12 h) on day 22 and the antibiotic was changed to
oral administration of clavulanic acid/amoxicillin on day 41. Finally, C‐reactive protein and white blood cells were decreased to 1.3 mg/dL
and 5,100/μL, respectively, and she was discharged without any complications. (a) Magnetic resonance imaging on day 4 after admission. (b)
Computed tomography on day 7. (c) Magnetic resonance imaging on day 11. (d) Drainage under computed tomography guidance on day 11. Iliopsoas
abscess is an uncommon disease, which is difficult to diagnose. Risk factors include diabetes and various forms of immunosuppression, such
as alcohol addiction, steroid use, malnutrition and HIV infection. The classic presentation includes fever, and back and limb pain1. In the
present case, there was a slight delay in the diagnosis, as the most prominent symptom was abdominal pain, which was not typical for
iliopsoas abscess, and we could not carry out enhanced CT because of a past history of Steven Johnson syndrome. This patient was a poorly
controlled diabetic, and methicillin‐sensitive S. aureus might have been hematogenously spread from her elbow wounds. In addition, this
patient was taking two antiplatelet agents for old myocardial infarction, which might have induced microbleeding in the iliopsoas muscle
when she fell down and hit her hips, and this might have accelerated bacterial growth in the iliopsoas muscle. When an iliopsoas muscle
abscess is suspected, CT is generally the investigation of choice with the highest sensitivity. In contrast, MRI provided diagnostic
significance in the present case, as we could not carry out enhanced CT. If we could have carried out enhanced CT on the first day of
admission, it might have led to earlier diagnosis. Considering the case in the present study, when enhanced CT is not available or
contraindicated, MRI could be a very useful alternative for diagnosis. In addition, we believe that it is important to carry out surgical
drainage in addition to antibiotic therapy in the case of large, complex or loculated abscesses. Indeed, it was reported that failure rates
of percutaneous drainage alone were as high as 60%, and that 44% of patients ultimately required open drainage2. Taken together, when
iliopsoas abscess is suspected, physicians should survey patients by CT scan or MRI, and should consider invasive treatment including
surgical drainage. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
