Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 61 Final Diagnosis: Benazepril induced agranulocytosis Symptoms: Sepsis
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: None Specialty: Critical Care Medicine Rare disease Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors are widely
used drugs, and in appropriately selected patients, serious side effects are infrequent. Commonly seen side effects include cough, rash,
hyperkalemia, renal dysfunction, and angioedema. Historically, dose-related agranulocytosis has been associated with captopril. Benazepril,
a relatively more potent angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, is rarely associated with agranulocytosis. Here, we report a case of drug-
induced agranulocytosis due to benazepril, with complete recovery of white blood cell count upon discontinuation of the drug. All tests for
other causes of agranulocytosis were unremarkable. This report highlights a serious and rare side effect associated with benazepril.
Benazepril is a commonly employed anti-hypertensive medication, and we report an unusual condition associated with this medication in order
to increase vigilance among caregivers. In such cases, prompt recognition and discontinuation of the causative drug can make the difference
between a recovery and a fatal outcome associated with drug-induced agranulocytosis. Neutropenia is usually defined as an absolute
neutrophil count (ANC) below 1,500 cells/μL (<1.5×109/L). Agranulocytosis, a life-threatening condition also known as granulocytopenia, is
defined as severe neutropenia (i.e., ANC <500 cells/μL). This severe decrease in infection-fighting cells leaves the patient at high risk
for serious infections. The majority of cases are acquired as a secondary complication to the administration of certain drugs . Although
this complication is associated with an increasing number of drugs, the current literature shows a stable incidence of drug-induced
agranulocytosis (DIAG). However, an accurate estimation of incidence is difficult to quantify because the condition is likely underreported
. The detailed pathological mechanism of DIAG is poorly understood and a causal relationship between the condition and a drug can be
difficult to elicit. Most of the literature on DIAG is based on reported cases rather than epidemiological studies, and there is a need for
increased awareness of drugs that can cause neutropenia in order to avoid fatal complications. There are many drugs listed in the etiology
of DIAG, including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs). ACEIs are considered first-line medications for congestive heart
failure and hypertension, especially in patients with diabetes and chronic kidney disease. ACEIs have a good safety profile, are rarely
associated with adverse events, and are generally not life-threating . Despite these encouraging statistics, captopril has been reported to
cause agranulocytosis. Here, we present a rare case of agranulocytosis following treatment with benazepril. There are very few suspected
cases of agranulocytosis submitted to the WHO newsletter; to the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report of benazepril-induced
agranulocytosis reported in the curated literature on the PubMed database. A 61-year-old, Hispanic male was admitted to the emergency
department with complaints of throat pain and difficulty swallowing which had lasted one week. The patient denied any contact with
individuals known to be sick. There was no history of recent travel, weight loss, or night sweats. The only comorbid condition was
hypertension. The patient denied any history of smoking or recreational drug abuse. In the emergency department, vital signs were within
normal limits, except for a temperature of 102°F (38.8°C). Physical examination revealed good bilateral equal air entry with no added
rhonchi or wheezing. Cardiovascular and neurological examinations revealed no abnormalities. The abdomen was soft and non-tender, without
palpable visceromegaly. Complete blood count showed white blood cell count of 0.5 K/μL with absolute neutrophilic count of zero, normal
hemoglobin level, mildly decreased hematocrit of 39%, and normal platelet count. The patient was diagnosed as having febrile neutropenia,
and therefore, admitted to the hospital for additional investigation and management. Initially, the patient was started on broad-spectrum
antibiotics for pharyngitis and suspected pharyngeal abscess. Peripheral smear, comprehensive metabolic panel, and hemoglobin
electrophoresis were within normal limits. Results of a malaria smear were negative. T and B cell assay was normal. HTLV I and II antibody
assays were negative. Heterophilic antibodies were not detected, and tests for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV-VCA) IgM, HIV, RPR, and ANA were
negative. Serum protein electrophoresis showed only a decrease in albumin, but all other serum proteins were within normal concentrations.
Neutrophil antibodies were not detected. The patient’s ferritin level was elevated to 627.8 ng/mL; however, vitamins, folate, and LDH levels
were normal. A test for hepatitis A total antibody was positive. Hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B surface antibody, and hepatitis C
antibody were negative. Blood culture, throat culture, blood fungal culture, acid-fast bacillus blood culture, and urine culture were all
negative. A urine toxicology screen was also negative. A chest radiograph, abdomen ultrasound, and computed tomography of the head and neck
were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid was sent for several tests, including a venereal disease research laboratory test, assays for bacterial
antigens, viral culture, CMV PCR, Gram stain, acid-fast bacillus culture, aerobic culture, and fungal cultures. All these tests came back
negative. Cell counts and differentials, protein levels, and glucose level were within normal limits. The patient’s home medications
included amlodipine and benazepril. Benazepril was added for treatment of the patient’s anti-hypertension approximately two months prior to
the onset of symptoms. Benazepril, thought to be the offending agent causing agranulocytosis, was discontinued. This resulted in fast
recovery of the white blood cell count. The patient remained afebrile for one week and was discharged with a diagnosis of benazepril-induced
agranulocytosis. The patient was followed for two additional weeks in the clinic, and repeated blood tests showed that the white blood cell
count was 11.3 K/μL with 83% neutrophils after 21 days. The change in white blood cell count over time is shown in Figure 1. Amlodipine has
been reported to cause neutropenia only rarely, and a history of the recent addition of benazepril was more suggestive of it being the
cause. In addition, the patient recovered completely upon discontinuation of benazepril, and negative test results for other possible
secondary causes of agranulocytosis helped to confirm the diagnosis of DIAG secondary to benazepril. Neutropenia is defined as an ANC <1,500
cells/μL. The term “agranulocytosis,” first introduced in 1922 by Schultz, means a lack of granulocytes, and is used for severe neutropenia
(ANC <500 cells/μL) . Agranulocytosis is a rare and serious condition, and medications account for nearly two-thirds of cases . Despite the
emergence of new drugs, incidence of DIAG has remained stable over the last two decades and varies between 3.4 to 5.3 cases per million
population per year in Europe and 2.4 to 15.4 per million population per year in the USA . DIAG manifests as an idiosyncratic reaction and
is associated with high morbidity. Pathophysiological mechanisms of DIAG are poorly understood and highly speculative. In addition, there is
no gold standard test for the diagnosis of DIAG, which warrants the need for increased awareness and high vigilance among clinicians to
report these drug reactions . Emmanuel et al. reviewed the drugs that have been implicated in the occurrence of agranulocytosis. In addition
to these medications, Emmanuel et al. identified old age, septicemia or shock, and metabolic disorders as poor prognostic factors for
agranulocytosis . Clinical manifestations have been historically described as edema, necrosis, and pharyngitis, followed by coma and death
within days. Oral ulcers, septicemia, septic shock, pneumonia, sore throat, acute tonsillitis, and skin and deep seated infections are other
reported complications of DIAG . DIAG can occur via immune-mediated destruction of circulating neutrophils by antibodies or by direct toxic
effects of a drug on marrow granulocytic precursors; both mechanisms are mediated by reactive metabolites . Alexander et al. recently
reviewed the mechanism of DIAG, concluding that it is an idiosyncratic response triggered by reactive metabolites of the causative drug. The
ability of a drug to be converted to reactive metabolites was thought to be a useful marker to predict the risk of DIAG; however, the
research to support this hypothesis is lacking . Among non-chemotherapy drugs, antibiotics are the most common medications associated with
DIAG . Some of the medications that can cause DIAG have their own particular risk factors, such as HLA-B27, HLA-B35, and HLA-B38 in patients
with clozapine-associated agranulocytosis . Among ACEIs, captopril is well known to cause agranulocytosis, especially in patients with
autoimmune disease or renal failure . Enalapril was also assumed to be the cause of agranulocytosis in a patient who developed
agranulocytosis while taking verapamil and enalapril. Both drugs were discontinued upon diagnosis of agranulocytosis, resulting in rapid
restoration of white blood cells . Benazepril acts as an ACEI by decreasing the synthesis of angiotensin II. It is rapidly absorbed and more
potent in vitro than other inhibitors . While taking benazepril, eight patients have been reported to have developed agranulocytosis,
according to a pharmaceutical newsletter. Definite improvement was reported following the cessation of benazepril treatment in two cases
only, and it was concluded that these reports are inconclusive and alone do not justify a warning . We extensively searched the literature
and could not find any reports describing benazepril-associated agranulocytosis. Thus, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first case
of benazepril-associated agranulocytosis reported in the curated PubMed database. The diagnosis of DIAG requires a detailed medication
history and high index of suspicion for possible offending medications. Diagnostic criteria for DIAG include: a neutrophil count <500
cells/mm3, hemoglobin >10 g/dL, a platelet count >100,000 cells/mm3, history of drug exposure, and no previous indication of a secondary
cause of agranulocytosis . The other major causes of neutropenia in adults include benign ethnic neutropenia, nutritional deficiencies,
collagen vascular disorders, and hematologic disorders such as myelodysplasia . In our patient, the testing designed to elucidate secondary
causes of agranulocytosis was unremarkable. The patient did not have any history of neutropenia in the past, and there was no remission
after benazepril was stopped, a result that contraindicates a diagnosis of cyclic neutropenia. Certain bacterial infections, such as typhoid
fever, shigellosis, brucellosis, and tuberculosis are often associated with neutropenia. In addition, some viruses, including human
immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis A, cytomegaloviruses, and Epstein-Barr virus can cause neutropenia. About half of patients with HIV have
neutropenia, usually due to autoimmune destruction of neutrophils . In our patient, complete diagnostic testing did not reveal any evidence
of an infection. For DIAG, most data come from case reports. Because ACEI are commonly employed drugs, we report this case to increase
awareness among prescribers about this rare but potentially lethal side effect of benazepril. Previously described cases of ACEI-induced
agranulocytosis are mainly reported with captopril and in the context of renal disorder or rheumatologic conditions. Our case is unique
because benazepril was found to be the sole cause of agranulocytosis for this patient. Successful recovery of white blood cell count upon
discontinuation of the medication without further recurrence highlights the importance of prompt recognition to avoid untoward effects.
Statement No funding was provided for the production of this case report. angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors drug-induced
agranulocytosis human immunodeficiency virus cytomegalovirus human T-lymphotropic virus rapid plasma regain human leukocyte antigen World
Health Organization White blood cell count after treatment with benazepril.
