Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Source of support: National Natural Science Foundation of China, Project 81401354 Patient:
Male, 24 Final Diagnosis: Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma Symptoms: Fever • skin nodules Medication: — Clinical Procedure:
Skin biopsy • PET-CT Specialty: Hematology Rare disease Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T cell lymphoma is a very uncommon subtype of
cutaneous T cell lymphoma. The manifestations of this rare disease are atypical at onset, and may mimic some rheumatic or dermatologic
diseases, which causes the delay of diagnosis and treatment. We report a 24-year-old man suffering from intermittent fever and skin nodules
on the left anterior chest wall, who was initially misdiagnosed with nodular panniculitis and finally diagnosed with subcutaneous
panniculitis-like T cell lymphoma through repeat examination of biopsy of the skin nodule. Positron emission tomography revealed
extracutaneous adipose tissue involvement. Subsequently, hemophagocytic syndrome occurred while under a conventional dose of glucocorticoid,
but remission was induced by treatment with cyclosporine A and high doses of dexamethasone. In order to avoid the delay diagnosis and
inappropriate treatment of subcutaneous panniculitis-like T cell lymphoma, in addition to a thorough physical examination, PET-CT and
disease-specific pathologic, immunophenotypic, and T cell receptor tests of the skin biopsy should be performed. Extracutaneous involvement,
especially hemophagocytic syndrome, indicated worse prognosis. Even so, cyclosporine A plus high-dose corticosteroid could be an option of
treatment. Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T cell lymphoma (SPTCL) belongs to a new subset of peripheral T cell lymphoma characterized by
infiltration of neoplastic cytotoxic T cells into subcutaneous tissue . The diagnosis of SPTCL depends on the pathologic examination of skin
biopsy, but the manifestations of SPTCL are varied and mimic autoimmune disorders. Some SPTCL patients were initially misdiagnosed with
erythema nodosum, nodular panniculitis, lupus erythematosus profundus, systemic vasculitis, dermatomyositis, or pyoderma gangrenosum . The
unsustainable therapeutic effect of antirheumatic treatment led to reconsideration of the diagnosis. Systemic chemotherapy with CHOP
(Cyclophosphamide, Hydroxydaunorubicin, Oncovin and Prednisone/Prednisolone) or other anthracycline-based regimen achieved complete or
partial remission; however, failure of treatment due to disease progression or infectious complications also occur . In this article, we
report the case of a SPTCL patient with extracutaneous adipose tissue involvement and hemophagocytic syndrome (HPS), who was initially
misdiagnosed with nodular panniculitis. A 24-year-old man was admitted to the hospital due to intermittent fever and skin nodules in the
left anterior chest wall beginning 2 weeks before. He complained of night sweats and poor appetite. Relief could not be achieved through
antibiotic treatment. He was a nonsmoker and had no special family history. After physical examination, subcutaneous painless nodules were
found in the lower neck, back, abdominal wall, and left anterior chest wall (2×3 cm). The nodules were normal skin color, were not tender,
and were without peripheral edema. He had moderate splenomegaly, but no lymphadenopathy. Laboratory tests showed complete blood cell counts
were normal. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was elevated (825 U/L, normal range 135–225 U/L). Elevated liver function tests were found,
including alanine aminotransferase (ALT 124 U/L, normal range 4–41 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST 159 U/L, normal range 4–40 U/L),
and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GT 159 U/L, normal range 10–71 U/L). The CT scan confirmed edema of subcutaneous soft tissue and
adipose tissue in the local left anterior chest wall. Positron emission tomography (PET) detected multiple patchy foci of 2-deoxy-2-fluoro-
D-glucose (FDG) uptake in multiple subcutaneous nodular lesions in the upper extremities, right trunk, and chest, and in adipose tissue of
the fat pad of pericardium, peritoneum, retroperitoneal and pelvic cavity, right axilla, and bilateral inguinal regions. The largest nodular
lesion was located in the left upper anterior chest wall, with a standardized up-take value (SUV)max of 14.6, and increased uptake of F-18
FDG was also detected in the adipose tissue near the lesser curvature of the stomach (SUVmax 7.1), shown in Figure 1. Three needle
aspiration examinations for the subcutaneous nodule revealed lymphocytes, histocytes, macrophages, and adipocytes, without neoplastic cells.
The histological findings of skin biopsy from the left anterior chest wall showed adipocytes “rimmed” by atypical (neoplastic) lymphoid
cells. The abnormal lymphocytes were positive for CD2, CD3, CD7, CD8, TIA1, and granzyme B, but negative for CD4, CD56, CD20, and CD79a.
Some atypical lymphoid cells were CD5-positive. The Ki67 labeling index in these neoplastic cells was about 50% (Figure 2). In situ
hybridization excluded the involvement of latent Epstein-Barr virus infection in atypical lymphoid cells. Immunohistochemical staining of
TCRβ was positive for atypical lymphoid cells, while TCRγ was negative. Multiplex polymerase chain reactions of TCRβ and TCRγ were
performed, but unfortunately both of them were negative. The patient was misdiagnosed with nodular panniculitis initially because of the
results of needle aspiration examination and histologic lobular panniculitis without immunohistochemical staining, and received
glucocorticosteroid treatment (10 mg dexamethasone intravenous daily, later tapered to prednisone 40 mg orally daily). The fever could be
controlled initially and the subcutaneous nodules disappeared and could not be palpated anymore, but the high fever returned after 2 weeks
of stability. After infection was excluded through blood culture, cerebrospinal fluid tests, and tests for antibodies against HBV, HCV, HIV,
syphilis, CMV, and EBV in serum, the dosage of dexamethasone was increased to 20 mg daily intravenously. However, after several days his
thrombocytes decreased unexpectedly to 2×109/L, the bone marrow cytomorphologic examination detected phagocytic histiocytes, which
phagocytosed platelets and both mature and naive erythrocytes. Extremely elevated ferritin (49508.0 μg/L, normal range 30–400 μg/L) was
found. Due to the dramatic deterioration of the patient’s condition without further detection of skin lesions, review of the skin biopsy was
performed by an experienced pathologist, and immunohistochemical staining was done. Along with a potentially fatal decrease of fibrinogen,
HPS was confirmed secondary to SPCTL. The patient then received dexamethasone 40 mg daily intravenously combined with cyclosporine A (CsA)
250 mg daily. Two weeks later, his temperature and thrombocytes returned to normal, along with the same type of platelet transfusion.
Remission has lasted 5 months, and follow-up visits are expected. Rheumatologists or dermatologists should be vigilant that SPTCL may
resemble some rheumatologic or dermatological diseases characterized by inflammation involving the skin or subcutaneous tissue. Cutaneous T
cell lymphoma (CTCL) and other reactive conditions should also be considered during differential diagnosis, because atypical T cells could
be found in these circumstances. This case taught us a lesson – that diagnosis of SPTCL depends not only on the clinical manifestations, but
also on the pattern of disease-specific pathologic, immunophenotypic, and T cell receptor tests. In the latest edition of the World Health
Organization classification of lymphoid neoplasms , SPTCL is defined as a CD8+ cytotoxic T cell lymphoma expressing αβ T cell receptor,
normally having indolent clinical behavior with excellent prognosis. However, some patients suffer from HPS, which results in fatal
outcomes. HPS occurred in the process of SPTCL in our patient, which indicated a worse prognosis. CT scans can easily show the location,
number, distribution, size, and morphological characteristics of lesions, as well as the shapes, margins, and depths of the lesions.
However, FDG-PET is a useful and sensitive examination to detect all the lesions, including the ones palpated on physical examination and
abnormal FDG uptake in the involved sites following treatment. The SUV is elevated in the subcutaneous lesions; for instance, an analysis of
8 cases reported that maximum SUVs on initial PET varied from 1.2 to 4.7, decreasing after treatment . PET provides valuable insights in
detecting lesions in SPTCL and may be useful in monitoring response to treatment. Since the failure of repeat biopsies is a common
occurrence in patients with SPTCL , use of PET scans in initial diagnosis may help to differentiate SPTCL from misleading clinical and
histopathologic manifestations. The use of FDG-PET in the initial diagnosis of SPTCL was recently suggested due to the reduction of SPTCL-
associated morbidity and the elimination of physical and psychological burdens associated with unnecessary repeat biopsies , which had
occurred in this case. Besides the common extracutaneous involvement of SPCTL, such as lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and hepatomegaly, PET
imaging helped us to find more extracutaneous lesions. We reviewed the literature and found that in a summary of 8 patients diagnosed with
SPTCL, only 1 patient showed involvement of the iliac lymph nodes. According to the author, lymph node involvement is uncommon . Rodriguez
et al. reported a case in which abdominal FDG uptake involved the subcutaneous tissues throughout the body and axillary lymph nodes without
any visceral involvement . In a case of low-grade nodal active disease in the right and left inguinal lymph nodes, abnormal FDG uptake was
detected in an intra-abdominal visceral fat lesion . In another case, increased FDG uptake in an area of fat stranding in the perirenal fat
was detected in the coronal PET, axial PET, CT, and fused PET/CT images . Additionally, the involvement of the bone marrow in SPTCL was
reported by the indications of PET findings and bone marrow biopsy . Breast involvement was also described by morphological (CT and MRI) and
functional (FDG-PET) imaging findings. Our case revealed elevated FDG uptake by the diffuse visceral adipose tissues beside the subcutaneous
tissues. Therefore, although extracutaneous involvement is rare, the possibility of its occurrence should not be overlooked. HPS is one of
the most serious and frequently life-threatening complications of SPTCL. The prognosis of SPTCL is considered to be generally favorable;
however, patients whose cases are complicated by HPS have a significantly worse survival rate . HPS is characterized by fever, cytopenia,
and pathologic findings of hemophagocytosis in bone marrow. The detailed mechanism of HPS associated with SPTCL remain unclear, but is
thought to be related to cytokine and chemokine production by the malignant cells, perhaps in a setting of comprised cytolytic function.
Only thrombocytopenia occurred in our patient, but the diagnosis of HPS was confirmed by fever, splenomegaly, abnormal liver function,
decreased fibrinogen, elevated ferritin, and phagocytosis in bone marrow. Based on the development of the SPTCL disease, decisions for
treatment may be made in different ways. For patients who had a relatively indolent presentation, immunosuppressive agents such as
prednisone, cyclophosphamide, or methotrexate are the initial treatment options; while for the patients with aggressive disease, combination
chemotherapy regimens are most frequently used . In addition, radiotherapy and stem cell transplantation were reported as options for
treatment. CsA plus dexamethasone was administered in our case and induced the improvement of SPTCL. There were significant parallels with
the report according to which CsA plus methylprednisolone treatment improved HPS with chemotherapy-resistant SPTCL, and induced complete
remission after 3 months . Because the time of first response to CsA was within 2 weeks in most cases, according to the review on CsA for
SPTCL (as well as with our case), CsA was suggested as a candidate in the treatment strategy for SPTCL . Some rheumatic or dermatologic
diseases, such as nodular panniculitis in our case, may be initially misdiagnosed in the early stage, but were finally diagnosed as SPTCL.
To avoid delayed diagnosis and inappropriate treatment of SPTCL, PET and disease-specific pathologic, immunophenotypic, and T cell receptor
tests of the skin lesions should performed in addition to a thorough physical examination. Extracutaneous involvement, especially HPS,
indicates a worse prognosis. Even so, CsA plus high-dose corticosteroid could be a treatment option. We would like to express our gratitude
to professor Qilin Ao, who reviewed the skin biopsy, recommended the immunohistochemical staining, and helped us to arrive to the right
diagnosis. We are grateful to professor Jianfeng Zhou and Dr. Jin Wang, who gave us constructive suggestion and examined the bone marrow
aspiration. Conflict of interest No disclosure statement of any conflict of interest. FDG-PET (A) images show hypermetabolism in multiple
subcutaneous nodular lesions in upper extremities, right trunk, and breast. Multiple patchy foci of F-18 FDG uptake were found in adipose
tissue of fat pad of pericardium, peritoneum, retroperitoneal, pelvic cavity, right axilla and bilateral inguinal regions. Fused PET/CT
demonstrated the largest nodular lesion, located in the left upper anterior chest wall (B), and increased uptake of F-18 FDG was detected in
the adipose tissue near the lesser curvature (C). Histological findings of skin biopsy from left anterior chest wall. (A) Low-power view
shows infiltration of neoplastic lymphoid cell into subcutaneous tissue (H&E, ×100). (B) Atypical lymphoid cells rimming adipocytes with
adjacent karyorrhectic debris (H&E, ×400); arrows point to the atypical lymphoid cells. (C) Neoplastic lymphoid cells were CD4-negative. (D)
The Ki67 labeling index in these neoplastic cells was about 50%. (E) Lymphoma cells are immunohistochemically granzyme B-positive. (F)
Neoplastic lymphoid cells were CD8-positive.
