Interprofessional education (IPE) is an important component to training health care professionals. Research is limited in exploring the
attitudes that faculty hold regarding IPE and what barriers they perceive to participating in IPE. The purpose of this study was to identify
faculty attitudes about IPE and to identify barriers to participating in campus-wide IPE activities. A locally used questionnaire called the
Nebraska Interprofessional Education Attitudes Scale (NIPEAS) was used to assess attitudes related to interprofessional collaboration.
Questions regarding perceived barriers were included at the end of the questionnaire. Descriptive and non-parametric statistics were used to
analyze the results in aggregate as well as by college. In addition, open-ended questions were analyzed using an immersion/crystallization
framework to identify themes. The results showed that faculty had positive attitudes of IPE, indicating that is not a barrier to
participating in IPE activities. Most common barriers to participation were scheduling conflicts (χ4,2852=19.17, p=0.001), lack of
department support (χ4,2852=10.09, p=0.039), and lack of awareness of events (χ4,2852=26.38, p=0.000). Narrative comments corroborated that
scheduling conflicts are an issue because of other priorities. Those who commented also added to the list of barriers, including relevance
of the activities, location, and prior negative experiences. With faculty attitudes being positive, the exploration of faculty's perceived
barriers to IPE was considered even more important. Identifying these barriers will allow us to modify our IPE activities from large,
campus-wide events to smaller activities that are longitudinal in nature, embedded within current curriculum and involving more authentic
experiences. Interprofessional education (IPE) has become a pervasive component in the dialog of competent and quality health care education
(1–3), and research indicates interprofessional teams improve patient outcomes. For health care providers to become competent and quality-
focused, prepared to work in interprofessional teams, they should obtain training embedded within health care education curriculum (1–4).
The interprofessional core competencies published in 2011 by the Interprofessional Education Collaborative (IPEC) created objective measures
for IPE activities and were among the driving forces for agencies that accredit health professions educational programs to establish
standards for IPE (5, 6). While accreditation standards are insufficient to hold programs accountable for the full breadth of necessary IPE,
their inclusion sends a call to even the most reluctant universities and educators to answer (6). The delivery of IPE requires multiple
levels of support within educational institutions, from administration to faculty (1, 7, 8). While administration provides the framework, it
is the faculty who provides the front line instruction of IPE (1). Educators that embrace the new challenge and lead curriculum development
reap benefits of networking opportunities, strengthened relationships, and new insights (9). Despite documented benefits, the logistics and
time constraints placed on faculty may negatively affect educator attitudes toward IPE (9). Negative attitudes held by faculty can be
communicated to students through unconscious cues and non-verbal behavior, resulting in altered perceptions of IPE in students, potentially
undermining the intended objectives of the activity (10). Negative attitudes within the faculty across a campus may also lead to lack of
participation which can threaten implementation or the maintenance and advancement of interprofessional educational programs (9, 11). While
research emphasizes the importance of assessing both student and faculty attitudes prior to curricular change (12), the research specific to
IPE has focused mainly on the need, the outcomes, and the processes of IPE. There remains a lack of research about faculty attitudes
regarding IPE. Previous research is limited to faculty attributes that lead to positive attitudes toward IPE (11). In order to manage the
faculty attitudes and perceived barriers, universities, administrators, and educators must understand the attitudes of faculties and
identify the barriers that exist. The leadership at a Midwestern medical school created an IPE Curriculum Committee in response to the
growing body of research supporting IPE (1–3, 5). This committee developed two programs for year 1 health sciences students in the colleges
of allied health professions, medicine, nursing, pharmacy, and public health. Students are divided into small groups with proportional
representation from each college in each group. The first event, held during orientation week, focuses on IPEC domains of communication and
teamwork (5). The second event, held in February, focuses on IPEC domain of roles and responsibilities. Each event is scheduled for 3 h on a
Wednesday afternoon. A separate subcommittee, tasked with creating effective evaluation tools for IPE activities, was assembled. In addition
to program evaluation, the subcommittee developed the Nebraska Interprofessional Education Attitudes Scale (NIPEAS). Each of the 19 items in
the instrument relate to specific IPEC core competencies (5). The NIPEAS was originally created and used to assess the health care
professional students’ attitudes of IPE activities (13). After several years of use in student populations, it was decided to expand the use
of this internal attitude assessment tool to faculty. Attitudes influence effective collaboration; therefore, we asked faculty to complete
the NIPEAS to determine if attitudes potentially created a barrier to participating in IPE activities on campus. As the university proposes
new initiatives to expand and develop more intensive interprofessional activities, logistical barriers to participating were also
investigated. Full-time faculty across campus were invited to participate in the survey. Because we were interested in knowing what barriers
faculty experience participating in IPE activities, we extended the invitation to participate to all faculty on campus and not just those
who had participated in the activities. The NIPEAS is a 19-item questionnaire assessing attitudes related to interprofessional
collaboration. The items are rated from 1=Strongly Agree to 5=Strongly Disagree. The NIPEAS was initially utilized to assess the attitudes
of health care professional students both before and after they had participated in interprofessional activities. It was designed to be used
not only with students but also practicing health care professionals. Items on the NIPEAS stem from the IPEC Competencies (5). It was
decided to expand the use of the NIPEAS to assess the attitudes of the faculty across the university system. Institutional Review Board
approval was obtained for this study. Full-time faculty were sent a link to the NIPEAS questionnaire, which additionally included questions
about perceived barriers to participating in interprofessional educational activities. A list of 12 items was provided for them to check.
There was also an option to type in additional responses of perceived obstacles. Frequency statistics were calculated for faculty responses
to each item of the NIPEAS questionnaire. Kruskal–Wallis test was conducted to identify differences among colleges for NIPEAS items.
Descriptive statistics and Chi-square analysis were calculated for questions about perceived barriers to participating in IPE activities.
Analyses were conducted using IBM SPSS 22. Faculty were asked to provide narrative comments pertaining to perceived barriers to
participating in IPE activities. They were also asked to provide suggestions on how to improve IPE on campus. These comments were analyzed
for themes using a crystallization/immersion method. Two of the authors reviewed the comments and came to a consensus on their meaning. Four
themes that emerged from the analysis were categorized as priorities, relevance, location, and negative experience. Three themes emerged
from an analysis of the recommendations: integration, session content, and timing. Two-hundred and eighty five faculty representing all
colleges on the UNMC Omaha campus completed the survey (52.8% from the College of Medicine). Table 1 shows the distribution from the
colleges. Faculty participants Faculty responses to the NIPEAS were primarily positive (‘agree’ and ‘strongly agree’) for all items of the
NIPEAS (Table 2). The Kruskal–Wallis test showed that there was a statistically significant difference on three of the items. For Item 3, ‘I
understand my own role within the health care team’, χ4,2852=19.176, p=0.001 with a mean rank for this item of Public Health=159.93,
Medicine=124.19, Allied Health=107.02, Nursing=94.78, and Pharmacy=88.38. Item 6, ‘Appreciation of the expertise of other health care
professionals leads to a better work environment’, resulted in χ4,2852=9.746, p=0.045 with mean rankings of Public Health=134.33,
Medicine=122.83, Pharmacy=108.88, Nursing=101.40, and Allied Health=95.68. Item 19, ‘The health care team's approach should be determined by
the team as a whole rather than by the team leader’, had a result of χ4,2852=21.023, p=0.000, with mean rankings of Medicine=128.97, Public
Health=125.69, Allied Health=89.78, Nursing=88.12, and Pharmacy=77.46. Responses to NIPEAS items Bold values indicates level of significance
<0.05. Table 3 shows the most frequent reasons for not participating in IPE activities. A Chi-square test was conducted to determine if
there were significant differences across colleges for each item. Scheduling conflicts was significantly different across colleges
(χ4,2852=13.91, p=0.008) where 69.6% of Medicine faculty reported this problem of the 47.4% who identified this barrier. Lack of
departmental support for these teaching activities was significantly different across colleges (χ4,2852=10.09, p=0.039). Medicine faculty
constituted 79.1% of the 15.1% of respondents identifying this barrier. Nearly 26% of respondents indicated a lack of awareness of the IPE
events, which was also statistically different (χ4,2852=26.38, p=0.000), with 86.3% of Medicine faculty indicating this as a barrier.
Frequency of faculty indicating barriers to participation by academic unit Bold values indicates level of significance <0.05. To have
greater understanding of the obstacles for paticipation, participants were asked to comment on the struggles they have participating in IPE
activities. Analysis of the responses identified four themes, namely priorities, relevance, location, and negative experience. This theme
was represented in different ways. For some, patient care responsibilities were noted as preventing participation. ‘I do these whenever I
can; sometimes, higher priority events supersede my involvement’ (Medicine faculty). In addition, other comments indicated this was not a
priority of departmental administration, which prevented justifying participation. ‘Chair does not want time out of clinic for these events’
(Medicine faculty). Content of the IPE activities held on campus initially focused more on patient care activities. Respondents commented
that the sessions do not seem to match their discipline. With faculty involvement from public health and basic science departments in the
College of Medicine, the IPE activity topics initially would have made their participation difficult. ‘Not clear how interprofessional
education is directly relevant to my own teaching and department’ (Public Health faculty). Faculty who are not at the Omaha campus cannot
come to town to participate. ‘I am from Lincoln campus, therefore, we have limited collaborative practice’ (Nursing faculty). Some faculty
volunteered in the past and had negative experiences, with medical students being disrespectful. ‘Have previously done this but due to the
attitudes of the med students will not do again. They are very disdainful of other students openly speaking about their superiority. Not
putting forth effort’ (Nursing faculty). Other faculty noted the event activities were unrealistic and a waste of time. ‘I felt the methods
used, the activities offered and the way in which it was done was essentially worthless and did not reflect what the “real world” of
interdisciplinary work teams’ (Medicine faculty). To better understand what factors influence voluntary participation by faculty in IPE
activities, we sought to characterize faculty attitudes about IPE using the NIPEAS. In order for IPE activities to succeed, it is important
to know if the faculty have favorable attitudes about the concept of IPE and interprofessional collaboration (10). Faculty strongly agreed
to 13 of 19 items on the NIPEAS. When investigating attitudes across colleges, three items were statistically different. Faculty in the
College of Public Health rated understanding the various roles of the health care teams and appreciation of all team members’ efforts in
health care higher than other faculty. Traditionally having been considered the natural team leaders, Medicine faculty actually rated making
group decisions higher than the other colleges. Our campus has several services wherein multidisciplinary teams must work together to ensure
positive patient care outcomes which may be an underlying explanation for physician attitudes to be so positive, which relates to reports
about house officer training (14). In summary attitudes rated as positive; it does not appear that faculty attitudes create a barrier to
participation or engagement into IPE activities. Since attitudes regarding IPE do not appear to be an issue based on the NIPEAS,
understanding other potential barriers to participating in IPE activities is even more important. Scheduling conflicts and lack of
departmental support were most common barriers identified by College of Medicine faculty. This was reinforced by the emphasis on this not
being a priority from the thematic analysis. This could also explain why College of Medicine faculty most frequently indicated they were
unaware of IPE activities. With the emphasis on clinical activities, announcements emailed about participating in these events may easily be
overlooked. This further reinforces the work at Laval University and the importance of strong prioritization of IPE activities by senior
leaders (8). Although lack of departmental support was only 9.3%, lack of relevance of the topics in these sessions created a greater
barrier for faculty in the College of Public Health. The IPE activities incorporate case discussions and if there is not a deliberate
inclusion of how public health fits into the discussion, the faculty may not feel they have much to contribute. It should be noted that
although public health faculty did question the relevance of the educational events, they recognized the importance of team efforts due to
the nature of their profession. Identifying these barriers will allow us to modify our current IPE activities to better meet the needs of
the faculty. IPE program administrators can capitalize on the positive attitudes faculty have toward IPE to shift the campus from large,
campus-wide events that occur outside standard curriculum for all academic units to smaller activities that are longitudinal in nature and
involve more authentic experiences. That would also facilitate involvement of public health and graduate college faculty. Superimposing IPE
activities within the existing curricula can minimize conflicts with competing priorities, lack of academic credit, and scheduling
conflicts. Looking for opportunities to engage the different colleges in ways that augment their curriculum would limit, if not eliminate,
the barrier of lack of relevance and has the potential to remove the barrier of location as well. This study is limited by being from a
single institution using a locally developed attitude scale. We have collected validity evidence for the NIPEAS and have submitted the
results for publication (13). We also recognize that the IPE activities offered are unique to our campus. However, the barriers to
participation in IPE activities experienced by the faculty are common problems faced by many institutions. Coming up with creative solutions
to give faculty time to role model interprofessional collaboration through relevant and authentic educational activities is vital to the
success of future endeavors. Thoughtful consideration must be given to barriers to participation to further enhance and promote IPE and
thereby enhance interprofessional collaboration. Health care in the future involves functioning in teams of providers. Those who train in
interprofessional teams will be well prepared to work in interprofessional teams for the benefit of all patients. In order to facilitate
this ideal learning environment, faculty barriers need to be addressed so that they can create opportunities for and participate in IPE
activities. The University of Nebraska Medical Center Institutional Review Board reviewed these studies and deemed them exempt because
responses were anonymous. Gary Beck Dallaghan and Erin Hoffman developed the initial plan for this study and are the principal authors. Liz
Lyden provided statistical support for the study and has been involved with writing the manuscript. Catherine Bevil revised the survey
instrument used for the study and assisted in writing the manuscript. All authors have given their final approval for the publication of
this manuscript. None of the authors report conflicts of interest with the contents of this manuscript.
