Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acute autoimmune inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy that mostly affects the peripheral nervous
system. Little is reported about spinal deformity associated with GBS. This study aims to present a case of scoliosis occurring in the
setting of GBS. Case report and literature review. The patient was a 14-year-old male with scoliosis. His spinal plain radiographs showed
that the Cobb angle of thoracic scoliosis was 114°. History review revealed that he developed profound lower extremity pain, weakness, and
numbness after catching a cold 5 years ago. These symptoms progressed to unsteady gait and inability to stand up from squatting position.
The diagnosis of GBS was confirmed based on these symptoms. He underwent a posterior correction at Thoracic 5–Lumbar 5 (T5–L12) levels using
the (LEGACY, USA) spinal system. The Cobb angle was corrected from 114° to 45° (correction rate 60.5%). His follow-up was symptomatic, well
balanced in the coronal planes, with solid fusion 12 months after the operation. Neuromuscular scoliosis could develop secondary to GBS.
When evaluating patients with acute inflammatory polyneuropathy, clinical examination of the spine is essential to identify patients with
rare neuromuscular scoliosis. Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acute autoimmune inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy that mostly
affected the peripheral nervous system. GBS is clinically characterized by progressive symmetrical weakness of limbs, with or without
autonomic or sensory disturbances. The worldwide incidence of GBS is 1.2 to 3 cases per 100,000. GBS may be induced by various factors, such
as immunization, infection, trauma, or surgery. The pathogenesis of GBS was that neural antigens were cross-reactivated with antibodies to
infections including cytomegalovirus, Hemophilus influenzae, Mycoplasma pneumonia, and herpes simplex. In this study, we reported a case of
GBS in a 14-year-old patient with scoliosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's parents on behalf of the child for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. We present a 14-year-old patient admitted for a correction of his progressive scoliosis deformity. His spinal plain radiographs
showed that the Cobb angle of thoracic scoliosis was 114° (Fig. 1), suggesting the need for surgical correction. Standing anteroposterior
and lateral radiographs of the preoperation. His medical history included the diagnosis GBS at the age of 9. He complained about profound
lower extremity weakness and numbness after catching a cold. One week later, pain and weakness in the lower limbs, unsteady gait, and the
inability to stand up from squatting position unassisted, developed, and progressed. The diagnosis of GBS was confirmed in the local
hospital. The patient received treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin and steroids. He showed significant recovery in strength in lower
extremities after 2 weeks of treatment. Two years later, the patient presented to the spinal service complaining of asymmetry of his
shoulders. The deformity progressed over 1 year. His spinal plain radiographs showed that the Cobb angle of thoracic scoliosis was 114°,
suggesting the need for surgical correction. Computed tomography revealed no vertebral body deformities. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed
that cavernous hemangioma in the T4 (Thoracic 4) level of the spinal cord (Fig. 2). Therefore, cavernous hemangioma resection was performed
in the Department of Neurosurgery of our hospital and histological examination confirmed the diagnosis of cavernous angioma. Magnetic
resonance imaging revealed that spinal-cord cavernous hemangioma in the Thoracic 4 level of the spinal cord. Three months after the
cavernous hemangioma resection surgery, a posterior correction and fusion at T5 (Thoracic 5)–L5 (Lumbar 5) levels was performed, using the
LEGACY spinal system (USA). The total operation time was about 4 h. Total amount of blood loss was 1200 mL and the amount of autologous
blood transfusion was 650 mL. During the operation, the signal of this patient was normal using intraoperative spinal cord monitoring.
Postoperative plain X-ray film demonstrated a Cobb angles correction from 114° to 45° (correction rate 60.5%) (Fig. 3). His follow-up was
symptomatic, well balanced in the coronal planes, with solid fusion (Fig. 4) 12 months after the operation. Standing anteroposterior and
lateral radiographs of 4 d after operation. Standing anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of 12 mo after operation. GBS is an acute
postinfectious autoimmune polyneuropathy, characterized by rapidly progressive, areflexia, and symmetrical limb weakness. The diagnosis of
GBS depends on the clinical features including rapid development of areflexia, muscle paralysis, and albuminocytologic dissociation of
cerebrospinal fluid. Limited reports are available on neuromuscular scoliosis. In this study, we reported this case of a 14-year-old GBS
case with scoliosis. In our case, lower limb pain occurred first, followed by weakness in the lower limbs, unsteady gait, and the inability
to stand up from squatting position unassisted. These symptoms progressed, indicating a high possibility of GBS. The patient showed
significant recovery in strength in lower extremities after treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin and steroids. Some patients may
develop neuromuscular complications such as neuromuscular scoliosis after acute onset of GBS. In this case, the patient presented to the
spinal service with asymmetry of shoulders 2 years after the onset of GBS. The deformity progressed over 1 year. These clinical features
suggested the necessary of surgical correction. As far as we know, there is no specific guideline for operations on patients with scoliosis
secondary to GBS. The onset of GBS with scoliosis could follow elective spine surgery. The present case described a successful surgical
management of a rapidly progressive scoliosis with contemporary posterior surgical instrumentation and fusion. In conclusion, GBS is a
relatively rare syndrome described in recent years. Doctors must keep in mind that neuromuscular scoliosis could develop secondary to GBS.
When evaluating patients with acute inflammatory polyneuropathy, clinical examination of the spine is essential to identify patients with
neuromuscular scoliosis. Many thanks are given to our center colleagues and the devotion of the patients. Abbreviations: CT = computed
tomography, GBS = Guillain–Barré syndrome, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation
of P.R. China (Grant Nos: 81272053, 81330044, and 81401847). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision
to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
