*N.W. and X.W. contributed equally to this work. Dear Editor, Rearrangements involving mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) are common chromosome
aberrations in infant, pediatric and adult acute leukemia, which are generally associated with poor prognosis. To date, more than 79 partner
genes have been identified . MLL fusion partners can be classified into four groups: nuclear proteins (MLLT3, MLLT10, and MLLT1),
cytoplasmatic proteins (GAS7, SH3GL1, EPS15, and MLLT4), histone acetyltransferases (EP300, CREBBP), and the septin family (SEPT2, SEPT5,
and SEPT6) . In pediatric and adult AML, the most frequent fusion partners are represented by MLLT3-AF9 (9p22), MLLT10-AF10 (10p12), ELL
(19p13.1), MLLT4-AF6 (6q27), and MLLT1-ENL (19p13.3) . However, as a partner gene, the SEPT5 gene has been reported in only five AML cases
(Table 1). Here we present two cases of de novo AML with MLL-SEPT5 transcript. Chromosomal analysis revealed a karyotype of 46, XX/XY,
t(11;22)(q23;q11.2). Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis indicated an MLL-SEPT5 fusion transcript. Sanger
sequencing of the PCR product confirmed the fusion between MLL and SEPT5. Notably, a new fusion transcript between MLL exon 8 and SEPT5
intron 2 was detected in one of the patients. Patient 1 was a 21-yr-old man who presented with fever, oral ulcer, and tonsillitis. His
hemoglobin level was 8.5 g/dL, white blood cell count was 35.45×109/L, and platelet count was 29×109/L. Bone marrow aspiration was
hypercellular, containing 81% blasts. Immunophenotypic analysis showed that the blasts were positive for CD45, CD33, CD117, CD15, and HLA-
DR, but negative for other markers. Cytogenetic studies revealed the karyotype of 46, XY, t(11;22)(q23;q11.2) /46,XY . Fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis using a MLL-specific probe showed a split in the MLL gene (Fig. 1). He received three courses of induction
chemotherapy in our hospital followed by a mother-to-son haploidentical bone marrow transplantation. To date, he is in complete remission.
To validate MLL-SEPT5 existence, we performed RT-PCR and direct DNA sequencing. Total RNA was extracted from the bone marrow cells using
TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) and chloroform. cDNA was obtained by RT-PCR using the M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Promega,
Madison, WI, USA). The resulting cDNA was amplified by PCR using 2×Hieff PCR Master Mix (Yaeson, Shanghai, China) and the following primers:
5'-GCTCCACCCATCAAACCAAT-3' from exon 5 of MLL and 5'-TTCTTCTCAATGTCCACCGT-3' from exon 4 of SEPT5 (Fig. 2). PCR products were sequenced on
both strands by using an Applied Biosystems ABI 3730 XL DNA analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The sequence was analyzed
with Chromas Lite software (version 2.01, Technelysium, Brisbane, Australia). The fusion between MLL exon 8 and SEPT5 intron 2 is indicated
by the chromatogram (Fig. 3A). Both breakpoints in the two genes have not been reported previously. Patient 2 was a 22-yr-old woman who
presented with sore throat, dysphagia, fever, and asthenia. Her hemoglobin level was 11.2 g/dL, platelet count was 54×109/L, and white blood
cell count was 140×109/L, with more than 89% blasts in peripheral blood. Bone marrow smears showed hypercellularity, containing 95.5%
blasts. Flow cytometric analysis of the blasts showed the following immunophenotype: CD45, CD14, CD13, and CD33. Karyotype was 46, XX,
t(11;22)(q23;q11.2) in all 10 cells examined. She did not receive chemotherapy in our hospital. MLL-SEPT5 fusion was verified by the
previously used method and the following PCR primers: 5'-CCGGTCAATAAGCAGGAGAA-3' from exon 10 of MLL and 5'-CAGCCATGAGTGTGAAG-3' from exon 3
of SEPT5. Long distance inverse-PCR is very useful for recognizing unusual cryptic cytogenetic findings, such as a rare MLL partner gene, or
discrepancies in molecular results that are hard to identify through common molecular diagnostic methods . Since we have identified the
partner gene from previous studies, we utilized RT-PCR and Sanger DNA sequencing to confirm the fusion gene. The results indicate the
rearrangement between MLL exon 10 and SEPT5 exon 3 (Fig. 3B). We described two new cases of de novo AML with t(11;22)(q23;q11.2), resulting
in a MLL-SEPT5 fusion. To date, five such cases have been reported, including three infants and two adults (Table 1). All patients with the
MLL-SEPT5 fusion gene were diagnosed with AML. Tatsumi et al. examined SEPT5 expression in 27 leukemia cell lines, including 13 AML and 14
ALL cell lines, which indicated that SEPT5 expression in AML cell lines was significantly higher than that in ALL. MLL-SEPT5 fusion gene was
important in the leukemogenesis of AML with t(11;22)(q23;q11.2). As previously reported, reciprocal MLL fusion proteins may have an
important role in leukemia development . The MLL-SEPT5 fusion transcript was uncommon and leukemogenesis mechanisms of the fusion protein
remain poorly understood. Future studies will be required to elucidate these mechanisms. Authors' Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of
Interest: No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Abbreviation: MLL, mixed lineage leukemia.
Abbreviation: MLL, mixed lineage leukemia. Abbreviation: MLL, mixed lineage leukemia. Abbreviations: F, female; M, male; mo, month; MLL,
mixed lineage leukemia.
