Retinochoroiditis is the most common ocular manifestation of congenital toxoplasmosis, but other associated ophthalmological pathologies can
also occur. Ophthalmologists are rarely able to distinguish between toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis due to infection acquired before or after
birth, unless other clinical or serological indications are present. This article reports a case of a 3-year-old boy with abnormalities
suggestive of congenital toxoplasmosis. The clinical and complementary examinations are discussed. The education of pregnant women is
crucial for the prevention of congenital toxoplasmosis. Awareness of antenatal and postnatal presenting signs and symptoms is important for
clinicians, because early diagnosis and treatment may minimize sequelae. Untreated, the majority of affected infants will develop
chorioretinitis, deafness and/or neurological symptoms. Retinochoroiditis is the most common ocular manifestation of congenital
toxoplasmosis, but other associated ophthalmological pathologies can also occur . Ophthalmologists are rarely able to distinguish between
toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis due to infection acquired before or after birth, unless other clinical or serological indications are present
. Awareness of antenatal and postnatal presenting signs and symptoms is important for clinicians, because early diagnosis and treatment may
minimize sequelae . A 3 year-old boy of a not followed pregnancy presented with an 8 months history of exotropia of the left eye (Figure 1).
Cycloplegic refraction was -0.25 and 0.00 in the right and left eyes respectively. Exotropia for the left eye An initial objective
assessment of the visual function showed a best corrected visual acuity of 12/10 in the right eye and Counting fingers at 1m in the left
eye. Examination of the anterior segment was unremarkable in both eyes. Fundoscopy revealed macular scar of about 3 papillary diameters
(Figure 2). Macular scar of about 3 papillary diameters The optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the macula reveals a disorganization of
retinal architecture related to a sequelae of Retinochoroiditis at the left eye (Figure 3). General examination was unremarkable including
the neurological examination. Although we have no serological evidence of congenital infection, we conclude to the diagnosis of macular
sequelae secondary to congenital toxoplasmosis based on the following arguments: the presence of a toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis, no acute
ocular symptoms, a history of squint in affected eye and a notion of untreated febrile episode during the pregnancy. Optical coherence
tomography (OCT) of the macula reveals a disorganization of retinal architecture related to a sequelae of retinochoroiditis
Retinochoroiditis is the most common ocular manifestation of congenital toxoplasmosis . The other clinical manifestations of congenital
ocular toxoplasmosis were choroidal coloboma, strabismus, nystagmus, ptosis, microphthalmia, cataract and enophthalmia . Epidemiological
evidence suggests that most adult disease arises from infection acquired after birth . Much less is known about the prevalence of infection
before and after birth in children with toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis. Ophthalmologists are rarely able to distinguish between toxoplasmic
retinochoroiditis due to infection acquired before or after birth, unless other clinical or serological indications are present . Knowledge
of the relative contribution and severity of infection acquired before and after birth to symptomatic ocular toxoplasmosis in children would
inform counselling and the public debate on the relevance of screening programmes for children . Retinochoroidal lesions due to infection
before and after birth were indistinguishable. The presence of bilateral, multiple or posterior pole lesions did not distinguish between the
two groups, but most children (84%) presenting with acute ocular symptoms had postnatally acquired infection. Children infected before birth
were most likely to be detected through abnormal vision screening or ocular appearance. Children infected after birth all presented with
acute ocular symptoms. The site of lesion was similar, regardless of when infection occurred . Retinochoroiditis is the most common ocular
manifestation of congenital toxoplasmosis . The education of pregnant women is crucial for the prevention of congenital toxoplasmosis.
Untreated, the majority of affected infants will develop chorioretinitis, deafness and/or neurological symptoms . The authors declare no
competing interest. All authors contributed to the work and write-up of the manuscript. All authors read and agreed to the final version of
this manuscript and equally contributed to its content and to the management of the case.
