Porous polyethylene implants are commonly used in orbital blowout fracture repair because of purported biocompatibility, durability, and low
frequency of complications. Delayed inflammation related to porous polyethylene sheet implants is very rare and no case series of this
condition have been reported. This is a retrospective review of clinical presentations, radiographic findings, histopathological findings,
treatments, and outcomes of patients who developed delayed complications in orbital blowout fracture repair using porous polyethylene
sheets. Four male patients were included with a mean age of 49 years (range 35–69 years). Blowout fracture repair was complicated with
implant-related inflammation 10 months, 2 years, 3 years, and 8 years after surgery. Chronic and subacute orbital inflammatory signs were
noted in two patients and acute fulminant orbital inflammation was found in two patients. Three patients developed peri-implant abscesses
and one patient had a soft tissue mass around the implant. All patients underwent implant removal and two of these patients with paranasal
sinusitis had sinus surgery. Histopathological findings revealed chronic inflammatory changes with fibrosis, and one patient had foreign
body granuloma with culture positive Staphylococcus aureus. Delayed complications with porous polyethylene sheets used in orbital blowout
fracture repair may occur many years following the initial surgery in immunocompetent patients. Low-grade or fulminant inflammation could
complicate blowout fracture repair related with the implant. Delayed complications related to alloplastic implant materials in orbital
blowout fracture repairs are infrequent and generally appear as isolated case reports. Warrier et al. reported inflammation and infection
that developed 1.5–20 years after silicone implants for orbital fracture repair . Custer et al. described six cases of late
infection/inflammation in supramid implants ranging from 8 to 16 years after implantation . Long-term durability and safety of porous
polyethylene implants for orbital fracture reconstruction have been reported [3, 4]; however, there have been very few reported late
complications. In a retrospective review of 30 patients, Ng et al. reported a patient who developed delayed onset recurrent implant
infection leading to implant removal . Samimi et al. reviewed 21 explanted periorbital biomaterials due to nonresolving infection or
exposure and reported one immunosuppressed patient who had granulomatosis with polyangiitis with an infected porous polyethylene sheet after
3 years . The former case developed several bouts of inflammation from 6 months after fracture surgery, and finally had the implant removed
36 months after the original surgery . In addition, the latter case involved an immunocompromised patient . In this case series, we describe
the clinicopathological features of inflammation after orbital blowout fracture repair using porous polyethylene sheets, which is rarely
encountered after a long postoperative duration in immunocompetent patients . Medical records of four consecutive patients who developed
delayed complications related with porous polyethylene sheets after orbital blowout fracture repair at Samsung Medical Center between 2007
and 2010 were retrospectively reviewed. Delayed onset inflammation was regarded if an implant-related inflammation occurred 6 months later
than the fracture repair. The clinical presentations, radiographic findings, histopathological findings, and treatment and outcome data were
collected. The Samsung Medical Center Institutional Review Board approved the retrospective review of the patients’ data, and the study
adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. All patients were male with mean age of 49 years (range 35–69 years) (Table 1). None
had a significant past medical history or current disease. Orbital blowout fracture occurred after automobile traffic accidents (two
patients), sports injury (one patient), and an accidental fall (one patient). All patients had uneventful blowout fracture repair using
porous polyethylene sheets (Medpor®, Porex Surgical, Newnan, GA, USA) of 1 mm thickness for correction of enophthalmos and diplopia, using a
transconjunctival approach for the inferior wall and a transcaruncular approach for the medial wall fracture. All implants were soaked in
gentamicin solution before implantation. Methylprednisolone (250 mg) was infused intravenously at the end of the surgery, and postoperative
systemic antibiotics were administered. None of the patients showed sinusitis at the time of blowout fracture repair.Table 1Clinical
presentations, radiographic findings, histopathological findings, treatments, and outcomesPatient number/Duration of onset of
complication/Location of implantAge (yrsa)Clinical presentationImaging studiesHistopathological findings/Results of
cultureTreatmentsOutcomesF/Ub time (mosc)1/8 years/Medial41Eye pain, diplopia with 2 mm hyperglobus, hypoesthesia for 14 daysPeri-implant
soft tissue mass, clear sinus in CTe Fibrosis with chronic inflammation and calcification/negative cultureImplant removal, mass
debulkingPostoperative persistent hypoesthesia of the cheek, 0.5 mm of the hyperglobus4.72/3 years/Inferomedial69Persistent eyelid swelling
for 5 monthsPeri-implant low-signal intensity with surrounding tissue enhancement in T1-enhanced MRf, clear sinusForeign body
granuloma/positive CoNSd cultureImplant removal, abscess drainageInfection resolved without complications3.13/2 years/Medial51Eye pain, skin
redness, conjunctival injection, eyelid swelling, hyperdeviation with diplopia for 2 daysD-shaped low density mass with enhanced rim,
mucosal thickening of ethmoid and maxillary sinuses in CTChronic sinusitis with eosinophils, features compatible with inflammation in the
nasal mucosa/negative cultureImplant removal, abscess drainage, sinus drainage by ENTg surgeons3 mm of enophthalmos5.14/10
month/Inferior35Eye pain, skin redness, conjunctival injection, eyelid swelling, proptosis for 1 dayD-shaped soft tissue-density mass with
enhanced rim, mucosal thickening of ethmoid and maxillary sinuses in CTChronic inflammation in the nasal mucosal tissue/negative
cultureImplant removal, abscess drainage, sinus drainage by ENT surgeonsInfection resolved without complications2.1 a Yrs years, b F/U
follow-up, c mos months, d CoNS coagulase negative Staphylococcus aureus, e CT computed tomography, f MR magnetic resonance imaging, g ENT
ear, nose and throat Clinical presentations, radiographic findings, histopathological findings, treatments, and outcomes a Yrs years, b F/U
follow-up, c mos months, d CoNS coagulase negative Staphylococcus aureus, e CT computed tomography, f MR magnetic resonance imaging, g ENT
ear, nose and throat The onset of symptoms varied among the patients. Patients 1 and 2 presented with subacute and chronic eyelid swelling
and pain, respectively (Figs. 1a, 2a). Acute fulminant orbital inflammation was seen in patients 3 and 4, who had eye pain, conjunctival
injection, and eyelid swelling with concurrent sinusitis. Patient 4 had an upper respiratory infection 2 weeks prior to the presentation of
orbital inflammation. None of them had any anterior and posterior segment abnormalities or optic nerve dysfunction. The implants for the
patients were well placed in the computed tomography (CT) scan except for one patient. The implant in the patient 3 was misplaced in the
posterior orbit showing a gap between bony edge and the implant. All four patients underwent surgical exploration and implant removal under
coverage of systemic antibiotics. The fibrotic tissue around the implant was resected partially and left behind for avoidance of vital
orbital tissue damage. All the explanted implants were submitted for Gram staining and microbial culture.Fig. 1Patient 1 a A 41-year-old
male presented with eye pain, diplopia with 2 mm hyperglobus and hypesthesia for 14 days. b Four months after explantation. c Coronal CT
showed a soft tissue mass (asterisk) around the radiolucent sheet (arrows). d The histopathological finding revealed fibrosis with chronic
inflammatory cell infiltration (inset: explanted implant) (hematoxylin and eosin staining, 200×)Fig. 2Patient 2. a A 69-year-old male
presented with persistent swelling at the inferomedial side of the right eye for 5 months. b Three months after explantation. c Coronal
magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed peri-implant low signal intensity (arrows) with high signal intensity in the surrounding tissue at
the inferomedial orbit in the gadolinium-enhanced fat-saturated T1 image. d The histopathological findings showed foreign body granuloma
with inflammatory cell aggregation adjacent to the fragmented polyethylene sheet (inset: explanted implant) (hematoxylin and eosin staining,
400×) Patient 1 a A 41-year-old male presented with eye pain, diplopia with 2 mm hyperglobus and hypesthesia for 14 days. b Four months
after explantation. c Coronal CT showed a soft tissue mass (asterisk) around the radiolucent sheet (arrows). d The histopathological finding
revealed fibrosis with chronic inflammatory cell infiltration (inset: explanted implant) (hematoxylin and eosin staining, 200×) Patient 2. a
A 69-year-old male presented with persistent swelling at the inferomedial side of the right eye for 5 months. b Three months after
explantation. c Coronal magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed peri-implant low signal intensity (arrows) with high signal intensity in the
surrounding tissue at the inferomedial orbit in the gadolinium-enhanced fat-saturated T1 image. d The histopathological findings showed
foreign body granuloma with inflammatory cell aggregation adjacent to the fragmented polyethylene sheet (inset: explanted implant)
(hematoxylin and eosin staining, 400×) Histopathological findings of the orbital mass revealed fibrosis and chronic inflammation (Fig. 1).
Patient 2 showed foreign body granuloma with giant cell infiltration adjacent to the fragmented implant spicules (Fig. 2). Coagulase
negative Staphylococcus aureus was cultured from the explant. All patients had clinical resolution after explantation and systemic broad
spectrum antibiotic treatment (Figs. 1b, 2b). Delayed inflammation related to orbital implantation for orbital fracture repair is very rare.
Approximately 350 cases underwent orbital fracture repair using porous polyethylene sheets during the same period from 2007 to 2010 at
Samsung Medical Center. Furthermore, there were no other cases out of 1000 patients throughout the entire surgical log of orbital fracture
repair at the same institution since 1994. This complication is very rare but should be reported for clinicians who care for orbital
fracture patients. A lack or reduction of fibrovascularization into the implant for orbital fracture repair might play a role in implant
infection. Porous polyethylene is susceptible to infection in the early postoperative period before sufficient fibrovascular ingrowth occurs
in 3 months [3, 8–11]. Our patient series showed delayed onset of porous polyethylene sheet-related infection or inflammation after
10 months and up to 8 years, which lagged beyond the duration for fibrovascularization. Mauriello et al. studied 10 patients who developed
infections after alloplastic implants with silicone and gelatin film for orbital floor fracture repair, and noted that the predisposing
factors were dental surgery, upper respiratory infection, implant extrusion into the maxillary sinus, medial implant migration resulting in
dacryocystitis, rhinoplasty, and snorting cocaine . Custer et al. reported small fistulous tracts between the supramid implant capsule and
the maxillary sinus that led to infection . In our case series, we speculate that the implanted porous polyethylene sheet and integrated
surrounding fibrous tissue adjacent to the paranasal sinuses could still be an incompetent barrier to sinus infection, even after a long
postoperative period. In patient 3, the edge of the implant did not cover the whole defect of the medial wall fracture, and which might
serve as a precipitating cause of infection (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Patient 3. a Coronal CT showed a D-shaped low density mass (asterisk) adjacent to
the radiolucent sheet (arrows). Sinus opacification was evident in the frontal and ethmoid sinuses. b An axial CT image showing a large low
density mass (asterisk) extending to the entire medial wall of the orbit. c, d Five months after the explantation and sinus surgery Patient
3. a Coronal CT showed a D-shaped low density mass (asterisk) adjacent to the radiolucent sheet (arrows). Sinus opacification was evident in
the frontal and ethmoid sinuses. b An axial CT image showing a large low density mass (asterisk) extending to the entire medial wall of the
orbit. c, d Five months after the explantation and sinus surgery Patient 2 showed chronic inflammatory signs with abscess formation without
sinusitis. The explanted porous polyethylene sheet was brittle and histopathological examination showed foreign body granuloma adjacent to
the implant spicules. Microbial infection and long-term tissue inflammation could result in implant degradation. In an experimental study to
examine the responses of implanted porous polyethylene after direct inoculation of Staphylococcus aureus into rats, electron microscopy
showed bacteria and active inflammatory infiltrates on the degraded implant surface . In another animal study, giant cells were detected at
the interface between the implants and surrounding granulation tissue, indicating a chronic foreign body reaction . In specific
circumstances, porous polyethylene in the fracture site can precipitate chronic inflammation and foreign body reactions. Three of the
patients in this series were culture negative for microorganisms. We could not determine whether the reasons involved prior use of
antibiotics or sterile inflammation. Absorbable alloplastic materials are manufactured and used for orbital wall fracture. They were
originally designed to sustain the prolapsed orbital tissue as long as the implant support was needed, and not to serve as a foreign body in
the fracture site . Long-term follow-up and accumulation of clinical experiences can help identify the proper implant for orbital wall
fracture repair. Porous polyethylene implants are commonly used in orbital blowout fracture repair because of purported biocompatibility,
durability, and low frequency of complications. However, delayed onset of porous polyethylene implant infection or inflammation may
complicate orbital fracture repair. Porous polyethylene sheets may provide an incompetent barrier to sinus infection, and can remain as a
foreign body in the fracture site, resulting in an implant-related inflammation. CT, computed tomography; ENT, ear, nose and throat; MR,
magnetic resonance None. All the data supporting the findings is contained within the manuscript. OA analyzed and interpreted the clinical
data and wrote the manuscript. DN also assisted in writing and revising the original manuscript and its English revision. AG made
substantial contributions to the experimental design and acquisition of clinical data. KIW and KYD conceived the study, participated in its
design and coordination, and revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. The Samsung Medical Center Institutional Review Board approved the retrospective review of the patients’ data.
