We report a rare complication of massive aneurysm of the proximal ligated end of the main pulmonary artery which occurred in the setting of
a patient with a functionally univentricular heart and increased pulmonary blood flow undergoing superior cavopulmonary connection.
Awareness of this possibility may guide others to electively transect the pulmonary artery in such a clinical setting. Ideally, patients
undergoing superior cavopulmonary connection for a functionally univentricular heart should have an antegrade pulmonary blood flow to
maintain pulsatility and circulation of hepatic factor into the pulmonary arterial system to prevent pulmonary ateriovenous fistula
formation. However, a subset of patients with increased pulmonary blood flow and raised pulmonary artery pressures in the preoperative
period require the interruption of the antegrade pulmonary blood flow to prevent the development of superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome. The
interruption of the pulmonary blood flow through the main pulmonary artery (MPA) may be accomplished either by MPA ligation or division.
Till date, published literature does not address the superiority of one over the other. We report a postoperative case of superior
cavopulmonary connection with complete interruption of the antegrade pulmonary blood flow by ligation who subsequently had developed a
massive aneurysm of the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT). The extreme rarity of this complication, the use of angiocardiography and
contrast echocardiography for diagnosis, and a brief review of the medical literature forms the basis of this communication. A 4-year-old
boy, weighing 15 kg underwent superior cavopulmonary connection with concomitant ligation of the MPA for a functionally univentricular heart
with increased pulmonary blood flow and raised pulmonary artery pressure under normothermic cardiopulmonary bypass without cardioplegic
arrest. Echocardiographically, the atrial septal defect was large and nonrestrictive. The child had been followed up regularly at our
cardiac outpatient department. Despite optimal medical management, by 8-year of age, the child had recurrent hemoptysis and persistent
precordial pain. Repeat echocardiogram and cardiac catheterization were performed for detailed hemodynamic evaluation. Echocardiography
revealed mild systemic ventricular dysfunction and a properly functioning superior cavopulmonary connection. There was no evidence of
antegrade pulmonary blood flow. However, a large echo-free space in the area of RVOT was noted. Computerized tomographic angiography
revealed a large aneurysm of the MPA and RVOT measuring about 5â€“6 cm in diameter compressing the left main bronchus [Figure 1a and b]. The
mean pulmonary venous wedge pressure was 17 mmHg. The child was taken up for MPA aneurysmectomy with concomitant completion Fontan
procedure. (a and b) Images from axial computerized tomographic angiography and reconstructed maximal intensity projection showing the
aneurismal main pulmonary artery. The right pulmonary artery and left pulmonary artery are getting filled from the bidirectional Glenn
circuit Given the complexity of the situation, the resternotomy was performed under femoral arteriovenous bypass. The aneurysmal MPA was
located proximal to the ligature, measuring about 8 cm Ã— 5 cm in size involving the RVOT and was densely adherent to the overlying sternum.
Identification and mobilization of the aneurysmal wall was extremely difficult and the aneurysm had to be laid open under profound
hypothermia for intra-aneurysmal obliteration of the RVOT [Figure 2aâ€“d]. The aneurysm was resected. The RVOT opening was closed using a
polytetrafluoroethylene patch (WL Gore and Associates, Arizona, USA). A lateral tunnel, total cavopulmonary connection was performed using a
fenestrated (4 mm) polytetrafluoroethylene patch. The patient had a stormy postoperative course with persistent Fontan failure with the
features of low cardiac output unresponsive to inotropes and pulmonary vasodilator therapy. The child died on the 18th postoperative day due
to septicemia. Permission for autopsy was denied. (a-d) Operative views of the techniques used to resect the aneurysmal main pulmonary
artery and closure of the opening of right ventricular outflow tract using a polytetrafluoroethylene patch Children born within the anatomic
matrix of a univentricular heart mandate a wellprotected pulmonary vascular bed to optimize their suitability for definitive univentricular
repair. In contrast to the western world, many patients in the developing countries present for medical help in late childhood. Several
investigators have demonstrated the difficulties inherent in using a grading system of the pulmonary vascular changes to evaluate the
severity of the disease and predict postoperative outcome of patients with a functionally univentricular heart with increased pulmonary
blood flow undergoing univentricular type of repairs. As yet, the safe upper limit of pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary vascular
resistance in the setting of a net left-to-right shunt in patients with a functionally univentricular heart with increased pulmonary blood
flow undergoing superior cavopulmonary connection remains unknown. Pulmonary artery hypertension has long been found to be a risk factor for
patients undergoing univentricular-type of repairs. This includes both the Fontan procedure and superior cavopulmonary connections. In our
previous investigation, we had subjected 82 patients with a functionally univentricular heart and postpulmonary artery band to second stage
superior cavopulmonary connection. This subset of patients was considered less than ideal candidates for a complete cavopulmonary
connection. These patients underwent bidirectional Glenn under at least one of the following conditions: (i) The mean pulmonary artery
pressure was >20 mmHg with a net left-to-right shunt, and (ii) pulmonary vascular resistance >3.0 (and <4.5) Wood units/m2 but reactive to
vasodilators including nitric oxide. The primary aim for conversion to bidirectional Glenn was to reduce ventricular pressure and volume
load, and possibly to improve candidature for future completion Fontan. It is noteworthy that a substantial number of this subset of
patients required complete interruption of antegrade pulmonary blood flow to reduce the Glenn pressure to <20 mmHg to prevent SVC syndrome.
In order to avoid the transection of the pulmonary artery and subjecting the transected proximal pulmonary arterial end to systemic
ventricular pressure, we have been ligating the pulmonary artery to achieve our objective. The current case serves to emphasize that the
interruption of the antegrade pulmonary blood flow in the setting of superior cavopulmonary connection should always be done by pulmonary
artery transaction and not pulmonary artery ligation. Interruption of the pulmonary artery would avoid subjecting the proximal ligated
pulmonary artery stump to increased systemic ventricular pressure, thereby avoiding/eliminating the development of this complication. In
order to avoid bleeding complication, we would recommend re-enforcement of the transected proximal pulmonary arterial stump using pledgeted
sutures. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
