Synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis (SAPHO) syndrome is an increasingly recognized entity. The hip joint is known as a
less frequently affected site in SAPHO syndrome, and there has been limited reports about hip joint diseases caused by SAPHO syndrome, and
as such adequate treatment for this disease spectrum is still not fully elucidated. We describe the case of a 52-year-old man admitted for
SAPHO syndrome who went on to be diagnosed with advanced secondary hip arthritis associated with disabling right hip pain. The diagnosis of
SAPHO syndrome was delayed; the patient was given a clinical diagnosis of osteomyelitis and treated with prolonged courses of antibiotics
and open surgical debridement at previous tertiary health facility. The patient underwent 2-stage joint replacement surgery in our hospital.
At 1 year after the surgery, he is well, with minimal right hip pain and the prosthesis is functioning well. This case shows the safety and
effectiveness of the 2-stage joint replacement in treating destructive hip disease caused by SAPHO syndrome mimicking infectious arthritis.
In 1987, Chamot et al first introduced the concept of synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis (SAPHO) syndrome to describe
the osteoarticular and dermatological lesions, and in 1994, Kahn and Khan proposed the diagnostic criteria of SAPHO syndrome. In addition,
the most commonly affected skeletal sites are known to be the anterior chest wall, including the sternoclavicular, manubriosternal, and
costosternal joints; however, iliac and femoral osteitis have also been reported. Due to the variety of clinical presentations, the
treatment of SAPHO syndrome remains a challenge and outcomes are known to be disappointing. Attention to SAPHO syndrome, especially for
treatment, has been increasing recently. Also, the treatment of the SAPHO syndrome has been predominantly conservative and many studies have
been reported concerning the results of medical treatment. Surgery, meanwhile, has been considered for patients whose condition has failed
to respond to all other therapeutic interventions. The hip joint is known as a less frequently affected site in SAPHO syndrome, and there
has been limited reports about hip joint diseases caused by SAPHO syndrome, and as such adequate treatment for this disease spectrum is
still not fully elucidated. Our patient was suffering from right hip joint pain for several years without accurate diagnosis and appropriate
target therapy. He complained of severe right hip pain with limited range of motion of the hip joint. Radiological examination demonstrated
severe secondary osteoarthritic hip joint disease indicated for joint replacement surgery. We were confronted with a great challenge due to
the absence of approved guidelines for surgical treatment of severely damaged hip joint caused by SAPHO syndrome. In the following report,
we describe a case where a 2-stage total hip arthroplasty (THA) was successfully employed and managed the severely damaged right hip joint
caused by SAPHO syndrome. A 52-year-old male was referred to us with severe right hip pain worsening for the last 3 years. He was an
otherwise healthy man with no other medical or trauma history. At the previous health facility, he was given a clinical diagnosis of chronic
osteomyelitis and treated with prolonged courses of antibiotics and open surgical debridement. However, notwithstanding all these
treatments, the right hip pain continued with limited range of motion of right hip joint. On arrival, physical examination of the whole body
was performed, and the examination demonstrated disabling motion pain and significant loss of range of motion on his right hip joint with
plantar pustulosis on both feet (Fig. 1). Laboratory examinations were normal, except for significant increases in C-reactive protein (CRP)
and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (2.92 mg/dL and 57 mm/h, respectively). Systemic radiographic examinations were carried out. The
right hip demonstrated evenly narrowed joint space and osteophyte formation with multiple cystic lesions at the femoral head and acetabulum
(Fig. 2). Manubriosternal joint, both 5th metatarsal bones of feet, demonstrated irregular cortical thickening with mixed radio-density
suggesting osteitis (Fig. 2). Computed tomography of the chest demonstrated sclerotic lesion of the medial end of the clavicle and manubrium
(Fig. 3). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right hip demonstrated periosteal new bone formation with multiple subcortical cysts in
the right ilium, suggesting osteomyelitis, cartilage denudation and joint space narrowing of right hip joint associated with osteophyte
formation, and subchondral bone cysts in right iliac and acetabulum suggesting secondary osteoarthritis. MRI also demonstrated increased
signal intensity in gluteus muscle and iliacus muscle, joint effusion, synovitis, and sacroiliitis (Fig. 4). Bone scintigraphy demonstrated
increased tracer uptake in the right hip joint and manubrium and sternoclavicular joints (Fig. 5). These findings were suggestive of SAPHO
syndrome. Due to the severe disabling hip pain and end-stage joint destruction caused by osteitis resistant to previous antibiotic treatment
and open surgical debridement, we planned to employ total joint replacement surgery for this problem. However, we cautiously approached this
case with 2-stage THA as a definitive surgery, considering possible infectious osteitis involving the right hip joint. Plantar pustulosis on
both feet. Multiple lesions were detected in different sites by simple radiograhs. (A) Simple radiograph of both hip anteroposterior view
demonstrated evenly narrowed joint space and osteophyte formation with multiple cystic lesions at the femoral head and acetabulum of right
hip joint, (B and C) irregular cortical thickening with mixed radio-density suggesting osteitis in manubriosternal joint and both 5th
metatarsal bones of feet. Computed tomography of the chest demonstrated sclerotic lesions of the medial end of the clavicle and manubrium.
MRI of the right hip demonstrated periosteal new bone formation with multiple subcortical cysts in right ilium and cartilage denudation and
joint space narrowing of right hip joint associated with osteophyte formation and subchondral bone cysts in the right iliac and acetabulum
suggesting secondary osteoarthritis. MRI also demonstrated increased signal intensity in the gluteus muscle and iliacus muscle, joint
effusion, synovitis, and sacroiliitis. MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. Bone scintigraphy demonstrated increased tracer uptake in the right
hip joint and manubrium and sternoclavicular joints. In the first stage, all necrotic and devitalized tissues were removed, and the
functional temporary prosthesis was inserted with the cement mixed with vancomycin and streptomycin. A tissue biopsy (5–6 specimens from
acetabulum and femur) was collected and sent for extended cultures for 2 weeks. Intraoperative findings demonstrated that the femoral head
and the acetabulum were severely eroded at the whole right hip joint where the cartilage had peeled off. Slightly dark brown colored joint
fluid was seen without grossly pus-like fluid. Femoral neck cutting and extensive synovectomy around the right hip joint was performed, and
frozen biopsy demonstrated <5 neutrophil counts/mm3 in all intraoperative specimens. Vancomycin powder (3 g) and 1 g of streptomycin were
mixed for each bag (40 g) of antibiotic-impregnated polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), which was applied in the doughy phase to the temporary
functional hip prosthesis. The prosthesis was inserted during the late stages of polymerization to minimize osseous interdigitation to
facilitate later removal in the second stage. As with the femoral component, we added 3 g of vancomycin powder and 1 g of streptomycin for
each bag (40 g) of antibiotic-impregnated PMMA. Numerous intraoperative samples were obtained for microbiological analysis during the first
stage. Gram stain and culture from right hip joint intraoperatively were all negative. Histopathologic examination demonstrated dense
lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with synovial hyperplasia, which is suggestive of secondary osteoarthritis. During the interval period
between the 2 stages, intravenous antibiotics were administered for just 1 day postoperatively without further antibiotics and patient was
allowed to mobilize and ambulate partial weight-bearing with frame the day after surgery. The patient was followed clinically, laboratory
for CRP and ESR and radiologically, provided that wound healing and inflammatory mediators levels are satisfactory (CRP < 1.0 mg/dL and ESR
< 30 mm/h), antibiotics discontinued and second stage performed. In the second stage, intraoperative findings demonstrated that there was no
evidence of infection. The decision was made to perform conversion to permanent THA. Implantation of a total hip prosthesis at the time of
the second-stage operation was successful, with no growth of a microorganism on any culture specimen obtained from the operative site during
the second-stage surgery. At 6 months postoperatively, the patient started ambulating without any assistant devices, and had minimal hip
pain well controlled by low-dose oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. At the present time, the patient is 1 year after the second-
stage operation. The hip prosthesis was fully integrated without signs of component loosening, with very good functional outcomes (Fig. 6).
Informed consent was given by the patient. Radiograph taken 1 y after the 2-stage total hip arthroplasty showed well-fixed prosthesis in the
right hip. To date, SAPHO syndrome is considered to be a rare disease whose real prevalence may be underestimated. Due to the variety of
clinical presentations, the diagnosis and treatment of SAPHO syndrome remain a challenge. There are several published diagnostic criteria
for SAPHO and the presence of only one of these inclusion criteria is sufficient to make the diagnosis. With regard to all of them, it can
be said that the criteria, made initially by Kahn and modified in 2003, seem to be the most precise when used all together. Despite these
efforts to correctly diagnose SAPHO syndrome, this syndrome could be a real diagnostic challenge. Aljuhani et al explained the frequent
involvement of soft tissues around inflamed bone in patients with SAPHO syndrome, with the consequent diagnostic difficulties. Boutin and
Resnick also demonstrated that the differentiation of SAPHO syndrome from other diseases that produce similar radiographical findings, but
have different prognoses and treatments, such as osteomyelitis, Ewing sarcoma, metastasis, and Paget disease of bone could be difficult.
Recently, there has been increasing evidence of the medication used in the treatment of SAPHO syndrome, which demonstrates a marked
improvement in the clinical picture of this syndrome. As such, it is a good therapeutic strategy to delay disease progression or control
pain caused by SAPHO syndrome with medication or physical therapy in the early stage of this disease. Unfortunately, our patient was not
correctly diagnosed as SAPHO syndrome in the early stages, which also led to inadequate therapy. The clues for the diagnosis of our patient
stemmed from systemic examination, radiological examination, and bone scintigraphy, which has been reported to be a sensitive and accurate
early diagnostic test for bone lesions of SAPHO syndrome. It had been reported that the hip joint is not usually involved in SAPHO syndrome.
Our patient had severe right hip pain associated with limited range of motion, and imaging studies demonstrated joint obliteration with
severe arthritic change and myositis around the hip joint. Through searching for references in the literature regarding how best to manage
our patient, very little information was available to guide us regarding the adequate treatment of this patient with SAPHO syndrome
affecting the hip joint. O’Connor et al reported that a case of a young female presenting with right hip pain. The patient was initially
treated as septic arthritis, but there was no response to antibiotic treatment. Further clinical and radiological investigation showed signs
of SAPHO syndrome. The patient subsequently settled on conservative management and made a full recovery. Contrary to this report, the
duration of right hip pain of our patient was around 3 years, and imaging studies demonstrated that the hip joint was obliterated with
multiple osteophyte and cyst formations, which makes for a good candidate for joint replacement surgery. Vavrík et al reported a case of
SAPHO syndrome affecting the knee and hip joint simultaneously. The patient was treated with knee synovectomy and primary THA. The reference
was not written in English and we could not find any further follow-up result about this surgical therapy. Despite all these efforts,
unfortunately, we could not find any reports about therapeutic references for severely damaged hip joint caused by SAPHO syndrome, for which
THA was indicated. Currently THA is regarded as a safe treatment option for advanced degenerative hip joint disease. Moreover, other
inflammatory diseases affecting the hip joint have been well treated with THA in severe cases. For the treatment of pigmented villonodular
synovitis involving the hip joint, synovectomy is generally accepted as the most appropriate surgical option; however, in cases
demonstrating end-stage joint destruction, THA combined with open synovectomy is frequently chosen. Although the etiology of SAPHO syndrome
is still unknown, 1 hypothesis is that SAPHO syndrome is related to seronegative spondyloarthropathies, especially psoriatic arthritis. THA
is an accepted treatment in patients with severe and painful deformities, caused by psoriatic arthritis. As such, we opted for THA for the
condition of our patient, whose hip was severely damaged by SAPHO syndrome. In spite of a negative result of Gram stain and culture through
open surgical debridement at previous hospital and an imaging study suggesting SAPHO syndrome, we could not assume that the cause of his
right hip pathology was definitely not related with infectious condition because of disabling motion-related hip pain and elevated
inflammatory serological markers. It is also worth recalling that SAPHO syndrome is probably a primitive reactive osteitis in genetically
predisposed subjects and that Propionibacterium acnes, Staphylococcus aureus, and other germs have been isolated from osteoarticular lesions
in the anterior chest wall, spine, pustules, and synovial fluid tissue. Based on recent reports, culture-negative joint fluid specimens
cannot definitively rule out septic arthritis. Slinger et al detected Kingella kingae with culture-negative septic arthritis. Berbari et al
reported that culture-negative periprosthetic joint infection compromised 7% in 897 episodes of periprosthetic joint infection during their
study period. Stirling et al also reported a false-negative rate of Gram-stain microscopy for septic arthritis of 78%. Apart from those
reports, it is well known that prior antimicrobial therapy is associated with an increased risk of negative cultures among patients with
periprosthetic joint infections. Our patient received prolonged antibiotic treatment prior to visiting our hospital, as such, it was safer
for us not to exclude the possibility of culture-negative infectious arthritis involving hip joint. When it comes to treating infectious hip
joint disease, 2-stage THA has been claimed as the gold standard and the treatment of choice, mostly in combination with spacers in the form
of antibiotic loaded PMMA. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first article focusing on 2-stage THA for patients with advanced hip
disease caused by SAPHO syndrome. This article reveals the safety and effectiveness of 2-stage THA to treat destructive hip disease caused
by SAPHO syndrome, mimicking infectious arthritis. Firstly, it was suitable for removing most necrotic and inflammatory tissues during open
surgery. Secondly, it could rapidly relieve disabling hip pain induced by SAPHO syndrome due to the above procedures. Thirdly, the
antibiotic-loaded cement spacer planted in the hip not only reserved the length and motion of the hip, but also helped to eradicate possible
undetected microorganisms in our patient with normalized CRP and ESR within 6 weeks of the first operation. Lastly, specimens obtained in
the operation for pathological examination and biopsy culture can assist in definitively ruling out infectious arthritis. Owing to the
recent introduction of new medications for managing this syndrome, it is really important to recognize SAPHO syndrome promptly in order to
avoid inadequate therapies and to delay progression to joint destruction. In spite of increasing awareness and improving medical therapies
of SAPHO syndrome, we consider this report to be incredibly valuable because we have only found very few references to treatment of severely
damaged hip joints caused by SAPHO syndrome in any national or international professional literature available. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report describing 2-stage THA as a treatment for severely damaged hip joints complicated by delayed diagnosis
and inadequate therapy for SAPHO syndrome. Based on our study, considering the difficulties in differentiating noninfectious osteitis caused
by SAPHO syndrome from other infectious osteitis involving hip joints, 2-stage THA was an effective and safe definitive management strategy
for controlling severe hip pain associated with severe secondary osteoarthritis complicated by SAPHO syndrome. While 2-stage THA can be
obviously recommended in cases like this, 2-stage THA should be considered unique and indicated only rarely after careful consideration of
all circumstances. Future studies of long-term follow-up and a larger series of patients are required to evaluate the effectiveness of this
technique for the treatment of SAPHO syndrome of the hip. Abbreviations: CRP = C-reactive protein, ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate, MRI
= magnetic resonance imaging, PMMA = polymethyl methacrylate, SAPHO = synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis, THA = total
hip arthroplasty. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
