Dear Editor, The Janus kinase 1 and 2 selective inhibitor ruxolitinib improves splenomegaly and overall survival of patients with primary
myelofibrosis (PMF); however, opportunistic infections, although rare, can be a problem . Here, we present the case of a patient who
suffered from an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) gastric ulcer due to severe immunosuppression induced by ruxolitinib. We treated the patient with
ganciclovir, which proved completely effective against the EBV gastric ulcer. A 77-year-old man with a 2-year history of PMF presented with
severe diarrhea. Six months earlier, ruxolitinib had been initiated at 20 mg twice daily. PMF-associated manifestations had improved
rapidly, but it had been necessary to taper the amount of ruxolitinib step by step to 5 mg twice daily because of repeated infections,
including that of herpes zoster. The number of T cells and activity of natural killer (NK) cells had been decreasing. When his wife brought
him to the hospital, he felt only mild discomfort in the epigastric area without tenderness by palpation despite experiencing numerous
episodes of diarrhea (approximately 20 times per day). A computed tomography scan showed massive thickening of the gastric wall. An upper
gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed multiple open-type gastric ulcers (Fig. 1a). No cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, or EBV was
detected in the plasma, but severe impairment of cell-mediated immunity was observed: CD4+ T cells at 123/μL, CD8+ T cells at 159/μL, and NK
cell activity of 7 %. He both HIV-1 and HIV-2 antibodies were negative. Although a stomach specimen showed no indicative features, a viral
infection was strongly suspected. Ruxolitinib was discontinued, and empiric ganciclovir administration was initiated. The following day, the
frequency of diarrhea diminished to two or three episodes per day. EBV DNA was amplified with polymerase chain reaction from tissue of the
gastric ulcer. Fourteen days of ganciclovir improved the patient’s general appearance, and he was discharged.Fig. 1Endoscopic appearance of
EBV gastric ulcer. a Endoscopic appearance before the treatment. b Endoscopic appearance after the treatment Endoscopic appearance of EBV
gastric ulcer. a Endoscopic appearance before the treatment. b Endoscopic appearance after the treatment To date, evidence supporting the
use of ganciclovir against EBV infections has been limited . However, the gastric ulcer was completely cured with a further 7-day treatment
with valganciclovir (Fig. 1b). However, although ruxolitinib was discontinued, the level of T cells and NK cell activity continued to
decline even after 1 month: CD4+ T cells to 78/μL, CD8+ T cells to 75/μL, and NK cell activity to 1 %. Three months after the
discontinuation of ruxolitinib, cell-mediated immunity began to slowly recover but remained low; in particular, NK cell activity remained at
1 %. The authors have no specific acknowledgment. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
