Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children. To date only few cases of medulloblastoma with hemorrhages have been
reported in the literature. Although some studies speculate on the pathogenesis of this anomalous increased vascularization in
medulloblastoma, the specific mechanism is still far from clearly understood. A correlation between molecular medulloblastoma subgroups and
hemorrhagic features has not been reported, although recent preliminary studies described that WNT-subtype tumors display increased
vascularization and hemorrhaging. Herein, we describe a child with a Wnt-medulloblastoma presenting as cerebellar-vermian hemorrhagic
lesion. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the presence of a midline posterior fossa mass with a cystic hemorrhagic component.
The differential diagnosis based on imaging included cavernous hemangioma, arteriovenous malformation and traumatic lesion. At surgery, the
tumor appeared richly vascularized as documented by the preoperative angiography. The case we present showed that Wnt medulloblastoma may be
associated with anomalous vascularization. Further studies are needed to elucidate if there is a link between the hypervascularization and
the Wnt/β-catenin signaling activation and if this abnormal vasculature might influence drug penetration contributing to good prognosis of
this medulloblastoma subgroup. Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children, representing approximately 25 % of all
pediatric brain tumors . Current molecular stratification consists in four subgroups associated with different pathways defined as Wnt,
Sonic Hedgehog Homolog (SHH), group 3, and group 4 . Wnt subtype is the rarest subgroup, accounting for 10 % of medulloblastomas and
patients with this pathway activation have a very good long-term prognosis . However, the biological effect of Wnt/β-catenin signaling
activation and the link with a better prognosis has not been clarified yet. Few cases of medulloblastoma presenting with spontaneous
hemorrhage are reported in the literature . Although some studies speculate on the etiology of the anomalous increased vascularization in
medulloblastoma , a clear pathogenetic role has not been identified. A correlation between specific medulloblastoma subgroup and hemorrhagic
features has not been reported , however a recent paper demonstrated that Wnt medulloblastoma secretes Wnt antagonists that increase the
permeability of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) . Furthermore, a personal communication hypothesized that this aberrant vascular network may
be associate with the Wnt subgroup . Herein, we report the case of a child with a Wnt medulloblastoma presenting as a hemorrhagic
cerebellar-vermian lesion. A 7-year-old girl presented to the emergency department of Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital with a one-month
history of headache and vomiting. Neurological examination was normal apart from mild dysmetria at the upper extremities. Multidetector
computed tomography (MDCT) reconstruction images show a hyperdense cerebellar-vermian lesion, with fluid-blood levels. This finding was
confirmed by brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that showed the presence of a mass with a hyperintense cystic hemorrhagic component,
heterogeneous enhancement, poor perilesional edema and absence of obstructive hydrocephalus (Fig. 1A). Spinal MRI and cerebrospinal fluid
study were normal. Due to these atypical features a cerebral angiography was performed, showing an intratumoral aneurysm-like formation
supplied by a vermian branch of the left posterior inferior cerebellar artery (Fig. 1A). She underwent a midline suboccipital craniotomy
with complete resection of the vermian tumor. At surgery, the tumor appeared richly vascularized from vermian branches as documented by the
preoperative angiography. Histology (Fig. 1B) showed a diffuse and multinodular proliferation of small undifferentiated cells and
immunohistochemistry revealed positivity for synaptophysin and β-catenin (both cytoplasmic and nuclear), all features consistent with the
diagnosis of classic medulloblastoma. The tumor was characterized by anomalous vascularization and harbored some clusters of anomalous,
thick-walled vascular structures along with numerous variably anastomosing small venous and capillary structures. Gene expression profile of
the tumor confirmed a Wnt molecular subgroup (Fig. 2). C-Myc amplification was negative (C-Myc/SPAST and C-Myc/PI4KA). She started therapy
as per standard arm of European HIT-SIOP PNET 4 trial which is used for the treatment of standard risk medulloblastoma. According to this
protocol, she received radiotherapy (23 Gy to the craniospinal axis and a total of 54 Gy to posterior fossa) given concurrently with weekly
vincristine (1.5 mg/m2 i.v.). This treatment was followed by 8 cycles of maintenance-chemotherapy consisting of cisplatin (70 mg/m2 i.v.)
and lomustine (75 mg/ m2 orally) on day 1 associated to vincristine (1.5 mg/m2 i.v.) on day 1, 8 and 15. At 22 months after diagnosis she
was doing well with no evidence of disease.Fig. 1MRI and histological findings in the hemorrhagic lesion. (A) [CT and MRI findings in the
hemorrhagic cerebellar lesion]. Sagittal (a) and Axial (b) MDCT reconstruction images show a hyperdense cerebellar-vermian lesion, with
fluid-blood levels (white arrows), confirmed by MRI scan. Axial T2-weighted MRI (c) showed a hemorrhagic cerebellar-vermian lesion,
expanding into IV ventricle, with multiple fluid-blood levels (white arrow). Axial-Sagittal T1-weighted MRI, without (d, e) and with (f, g)
gadolinium, revealed a solid component inhomogeneously contrast-enhanced (white arrows). Axial gradient-echo sequence (h) showed lack of
hypointense hemosiderin rim (cavernous hemangioma classical finding, white arrow). Preoperative left vertebral angiograms (i, l) show
hypoplastic vertebral artery terminating as posterior inferior cerebellar artery (vascular variation) and the tumor stain; an aneurysm-like
formation (arrow) is seen in the arterial phase. The tumor is fed by the vermian branch of the left posterior inferior cerebellar artery.
(B) [Histological findings in hemorrhagic medulloblastoma]. Proliferation of small undifferentiated cells showing a diffuse/multinodular
pattern (middle-right), associated to anomalous, thick-walled vascular structures (arrows) (a, H&E, 2.5x). Cells were synaptophysin (b, 20x)
and beta-catenin (both cytoplasm and nucleus) positive (c, 20x). Anomalous vascularization was characterized by clusters of anomalous,
thick-walled arterial-type vessels (d and f, CD31 20x) along with numerous variably anastomosing small venous and capillary structures (e,
CD31, 20x)Fig. 2Molecular characterization of medulloblastoma. mRNA levels of the indicated genes in medulloblastoma are compared to normal
cerebellum as control (CTRLs). Genes are grouped into four molecular subgroups (WNT, SHH, GROUP 3, GROUP 4) as indicated by the four
different colors. Relative quantification values are expressed as linear scale arbitrary units MRI and histological findings in the
hemorrhagic lesion. (A) [CT and MRI findings in the hemorrhagic cerebellar lesion]. Sagittal (a) and Axial (b) MDCT reconstruction images
show a hyperdense cerebellar-vermian lesion, with fluid-blood levels (white arrows), confirmed by MRI scan. Axial T2-weighted MRI (c) showed
a hemorrhagic cerebellar-vermian lesion, expanding into IV ventricle, with multiple fluid-blood levels (white arrow). Axial-Sagittal
T1-weighted MRI, without (d, e) and with (f, g) gadolinium, revealed a solid component inhomogeneously contrast-enhanced (white arrows).
Axial gradient-echo sequence (h) showed lack of hypointense hemosiderin rim (cavernous hemangioma classical finding, white arrow).
Preoperative left vertebral angiograms (i, l) show hypoplastic vertebral artery terminating as posterior inferior cerebellar artery
(vascular variation) and the tumor stain; an aneurysm-like formation (arrow) is seen in the arterial phase. The tumor is fed by the vermian
branch of the left posterior inferior cerebellar artery. (B) [Histological findings in hemorrhagic medulloblastoma]. Proliferation of small
undifferentiated cells showing a diffuse/multinodular pattern (middle-right), associated to anomalous, thick-walled vascular structures
(arrows) (a, H&E, 2.5x). Cells were synaptophysin (b, 20x) and beta-catenin (both cytoplasm and nucleus) positive (c, 20x). Anomalous
vascularization was characterized by clusters of anomalous, thick-walled arterial-type vessels (d and f, CD31 20x) along with numerous
variably anastomosing small venous and capillary structures (e, CD31, 20x) Molecular characterization of medulloblastoma. mRNA levels of the
indicated genes in medulloblastoma are compared to normal cerebellum as control (CTRLs). Genes are grouped into four molecular subgroups
(WNT, SHH, GROUP 3, GROUP 4) as indicated by the four different colors. Relative quantification values are expressed as linear scale
arbitrary units The consensus held in Boston in 2010 supported the existence of four main medulloblastoma subgroups based on the molecular
profiling and provided important insights not only in the selection of patients for molecular targeted therapies but also in the outcome
prediction [2, 3, 10]. Medulloblastomas with activation of Wnt/β-catenin pathway are rarely metastatic and appear to be a less aggressive
variant associated with an excellent prognosis . However, the significance of Wnt activation in medulloblastoma remains to be determined.
Several findings suggest that wild type β-catenin has an important physiological role in CNS angiogenesis. During embryogenesis, the Wnt
pathway has direct actions on axonal growth through interaction with β-catenin complex . Moreover, it has been demonstrated that Wnt
signaling plays an active role in the induction and maintenance of BBB characteristics during embryonic and postnatal development
particularly by regulating tight junction proteins expression . Indeed, Wnt/β-catenin signaling is very important for central nervous system
(CNS) angiogenesis and conditionally inactivation of β-catenin in the endothelium has been described to alter the development of head
vasculature resulting in early embryonic lethality of mice [14, 15]. β-catenin–null animals show vessel fragility, in association to a
decrease in intercellular adhesion strength and an increase in paracellular permeability leading to vascular leakage and frequent
hemorrhages. The critical role of canonical Wnt signaling in endothelial cells for formation and differentiation of the CNS vasculature has
been described also in genetic mouse models . Recently has been reported that G-protein coupled receptor 124 (GPR124) functions as a
specific co-stimulator of β-catenin signaling in brain endothelium and its disruption led to defective CNS angiogenesis and blood brain
barriergenesis in mice . In mouse embryos, eliminating neuroepithelial Wnt7a and Wnt7b, or endothelial Gpr124 or β-catenin, leads to a
reduced CNS angiogenesis with formation of abnormal vascular structures [13, 16, 18] and has been demonstrated that the interaction of
Gpr124 with Reck strongly synergize to promote Wnt/β-catenin signaling during brain angiogenesis . Nevertheless, most of the studies
correlating Wnt signaling with CNS vasculature anomalies are developmental phenotypes, and the relevance to post-natal development is not
clear. Moreover, β-catenin is important in the regulation of vascular endothelial cell-cell adhesions and barrier function by linking the
VE-cadherin junction complex to the cytoskeleton and thus vascular anomalies may arise for a non-signaling role . A recent study showed that
genetically modified mouse models harboring Wnt-medulloblastoma had more hemorrhagic tumors compared to SHH or group 3 tumors . The authors
demonstrated that these effects occur postnatally and reveal that Wnt medulloblastoma secretes Wnt antagonists increasing the permeability
of the BBB . We report a girl with a Wnt medulloblastoma presenting an anomalous vascularization. Differential diagnosis based on MRI
imaging appearance includes cavernous hemangioma, arteriovenous malformation and traumatic lesion. Angiographic opacification of dilated
arteriolar vessels with slow flow and lack of early venous drainage confirmed an aberrant tumor vascular network. This patient is doing well
at 22 months after diagnosis. Medulloblastoma can present heterogeneous features on MRI with variable enhancement patterns, cystic areas,
hemorrhage and calcification . Although intratumoral bleeding can be found in brain tumors, only few cases of medulloblastoma with
spontaneous hemorrhages have been reported in the literature [5, 22]. Park et al. showed that the incidence of spontaneous hemorrhage was
5.6 % in patients with primary or recurrent medulloblastoma . A study evaluating vascular regulatory expression profiles across
medulloblastoma subgroups documented an upregulation of proangiogenic factors in SHH subgroup . Despite specific mechanisms driving aberrant
vascularization and hemorrhage in medulloblastoma remain not completely elucidated, new researches revealed that medulloblastoma genotype
dictates tumor vessels phenotype . We reported a case of Wnt/β-catenin medulloblastoma associated with an anomalous vascularization. This
may support the evidence that Wnt medulloblastomas may be associated to aberrant vascular network contributing to a better drug penetration
and therefore to their excellent prognosis . This finding should be further investigated in a large patient cohort in order to elucidate the
vascular microenvironment in Wnt medulloblastoma subgroup. SHH, sonic hedgehog homolog; MDTC, multidetector computed tomography; MRI,
magnetic resonance imaging; BBB, blood–brain barrier; CNS, central nervous system We thank the child’s parents, who gave their informed
consent for publication. No funding to declare. The data supporting our findings will not be shared since is not ethically appropriate
(underlying data pose privacy concerns and might reveal the identity of participant). AM, AC and FL designed the case report; AC, AM, VAD,
GSC, FDC, EM, AM and ADG. analyzed data; and AP, EF, ADG wrote the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images was
obtained from patient’s parents. A copy of the written consent is available for review to the Editor of this journal. This clinical study
was approved by the local ethical committee of Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital.
