Perforating granuloma annulare (GA) is a rare subset of GA with an unknown etiology and chronic course. Herein, we report the case of 72
year-old women with a 3-month history of a post-traumatic, persistent, erythematous and exudative plaque located on her left leg.
Differential diagnosis included mycobacterial infection, subcutaneous mycosis, perforating dermatoses, pyoderma and squamous cell carcinoma.
The histopathology was highly suggestive of a perforating GA. The patient was treated with betamethasone dipropionate cream applied once
daily and a complete resolution of the lesion was observed in three weeks. Despite being a very rare subtype of a common disease,
perforating granuloma annulare has clinical and histopathological characteristic features that facilitate the differential diagnosis,
avoiding unnecessary procedures and inadequate and potentially more invasive treatments. Perforating granuloma annulare (GA) is a rare
subset of GA with an unknown etiology and chronic course . It occurs most frequently in childhood and it appears as umbilicated papules that
involve, most commonly, the extremities . Treatment could be difficult and unsatisfactory. Due to its rarity, the diagnosis is often
difficult and challenging. However, perforating GA has characteristic clinical and histopathological features that facilitate the
differential diagnosis, avoiding unnecessary procedures or inadequate treatments. A 72 year-old women was referred to our department due to
a 3-month history of a post-traumatic and slightly pruritic erythematous and exudative plaque located on her left leg. She had already been
treated with several antibiotics without any clinical improvement. The patient also complained of recurrent gelatinous material extruding
from the central area of the plaque. She denied any prior skin conditions or relevant medical history and had no history of recent travel.
On physical examination it was observed on the anterolateral lower third of the left leg, a rounded, ill-defined erythematous plaque with 3
cm long axis, centered by small erosion covered by adherent crust (Figure 1). Around the plaque there were some discrete erythematous
papules. The differential diagnosis included mycobacterial infection, subcutaneous mycosis, perforating dermatoses, pyoderma and squamous
cell carcinoma. A punch biopsy was performed and the histological examination revealed a well-defined nodular infiltrate occupying the
papilar and reticular dermis mainly composed of lymphocytes and histiocytes. Collagen degeneration with transepithelial elimination and
multiple palisading granulomas surrounding the necrobiotic collagen were prominent (Figure 2 and Figure 3). The exposed features were highly
suggestive of perforating granuloma annulare. The patient was treated with betamethasone dipropionate cream applied once daily and a
complete resolution of the lesion was observed in three weeks (Figure 4). Erythematous plaque centered by erosion covered by crust on left
leg. Inflammatory infiltrate composed by lymphocytes and histiocytes occupying the papilar and reticular dermis with palisading granulomas
surrounding necrobiotic collagen (H&E 40×). Collagen degeneration and transepidermal elimination (H&E × 100). Residual hyperpigmented macule
after treatment. Perforating granuloma annulare was first described by Owens and Freeman in 1971. It is a rare subset of GA with a chronic
course and unknown etiology. It has been suggested that a delayed hypersensivity, helper T cell response to exogenous antigens is
responsible for the development of the condition . In our case, T lymphocytes were identified in the inflammatory infiltrate, especially
CD4+ cells, which may support this hypothesis (Figure 5A). Some authors suggest that factors such insect bites, ultraviolet radiation, minor
trauma, viral infection, thyroiditis and diabetes mellitus are implicated in its pathogenesis . Extracellular matrix remodeling is also a
key feature in the pathogenesis of GA with large accumulation of macrophages . Factor III-A (FXIII-A)+ CD163+ cells (macrophages) and CD11c+
CD1c+ cells (dendritic cells) are dermal populations cells in the normal human dermis . While FXIII-A+ CD163+ cells were unable to stimulate
T cells, CD11c+ CD1c+ cells are typical antigen presenters and are classified as dendritic cells. In samples of GA, FXIII-A+ cells are much
more abundant, and the density of CD11c+ dendritic cells are also elevated. Recently, it has been shown that the necrotic areas of GA are
mainly composed by CD11c+ cells, which are surrounded by FXIII-A+ macrophages . The high number of CD11c+ cells found in the lesions of GA
indicates that, in addition to macrophages, dendritic cells should be taken into account in its etiopathogenesis . A similar finding
(necrobiotic collagen surrounded by FXIIIA+ cells) was also found in our case (Figure 5B), suggesting that FXIIIA+ macrophages and,
possibly, dendritic cells also play a role in the pathogenesis of perforating GA. Immunohistochemistry for CD4 and factor XIII-A; (A) CD4
cells in the inflammatory infiltrate (immunohistochemistry for CD4); (B) necrobiotic collagen surrounded by factor XIII-A+ cells
(immunohistochemistry for factor XIII-A). Perforating GA occurs most frequently in childhood and it appears as umbilicated papules that
involve, most commonly, the extremities. Sometimes, progressive stages of the disease can be seen: erythematous papules evolve to yellowish
pustular lesions which subsequently discharge a clear fluid. A generalized form characterized by larger plaques with necrobiotic centers,
ulceration and crusting could be seen in middle-aged and elderly patients and may be associated with diabetes . The clinical differential
diagnosis includes molluscum contagiosum, perforating collagenosis, elastosis perforans serpiginosa, perforating folliculitis and
sarcoidosis . The histopathological features of perforating GA includes the presence of granulomas with histiocytes sparsely arranged or
organized in a palisading pattern, surrounding necrobiotic collagen, which is typically represented by deposition of mucin, and rarely
fibrin. Often, the histiocytes may become epithelioid and multinucleate and be found phagocytizing elastic fibers. The process is
preferentially located in the superficial reticular dermis, causing perforation of the epidermis which is acanthotic and forming a channel
for extrusion of degenerated collagen. Special stains such as alcian blue and colloidal iron can be performed to highlight mucin . The
mechanism that leads to perforation remains unknown . Some authors support that the perforation is a consequence of a transepithelial
elimination process. Others argue that could represent an epidermal destruction by the superficial GA. Another hypothesis suggests that the
superficial localization of the necrobiotic granuloma and the vascular destruction provoked by the granuloma could lead to isquemic
epidermal alterations that conclude with epidermal destruction . The histopathological differential diagnosis include granulomatous diseases
such sarcoidosis or tuberculids as well as perforating dermatoses . The presence of collagen degeneration and multiple palisading granulomas
surrounding the necrobiotic collagen without the typical “sarcoidal” granulomas are features more in favor of perforating GA than
sarcoidosis . It is important to note that transepithelial elimination could also be present in the latter . The clinical and
histopathological features of our case are not suggestive of papulonecrotic tuberculids. Generally, the lesions of papulonecrotic
tuberculids are multiple and arise in symmetric crops, typically with acral predilection . Moreover, in histopathology, the vascular damage
is much more intense in papulonecrotic tuberculids than in perforating GA . Regarding the transepithelial elimination, it could be present
in primary perforating conditions (reactive perforating collagenosis and elastosis perforans serpiginosa), in acquired perforating
dermatoses which includes perforating folliculitis, Kyrle disease and acquired perforating collagenosis and in other dermatologic conditions
that exhibit transepithelial elimination as an incident histopathologic finding (as in GA, necrobiosis lipoidica, rheumatoid nodule and
others) . Our case was not in favor of a perforating collagenosis that generally presents as multiple keratotic papules on the extensor
surface of the limbs . Histologically, established lesions of this perforating dermatosis, shows a crateriform depression of the epidermis
associated with a keratin plug containing inflammatory debris and collagen fibers. Vertically orientated basophilic collagen fibers are seen
in the underlying dermis. Palisading granulomas are not a typical feature . The clinical (hyperkeratotic papules grouped in an arciform
pattern) and the histopathological features (abnormal elastic fibers) of elastosis perforans serpiginosa are different from our case,
facilitating the differential diagnosis between them . From a clinical point of view, acquired perforating dermatoses such perforating
folliculitis, Kyrle disease and acquired perforating collagenosis are less probable because there was no history of an associated systemic
disease, as diabetes mellitus, renal failure, liver disease, malignancy or cardiac failure . Moreover, perforating folliculitis is excluded
by the clinical (absence of folliculocentric papules with a central keratotic plug in hair-bearing areas) and histopathological features (no
involvement of the hair follicle) . The absence of diabetes and renal failure and the presence of the palisading granulomas on the
histopathology are also not in favor of a Kyrle disease . Treatment of perforating GA is often difficult and unsatisfactory. The options for
localized disease have included high-potency topical steroids or intralesional corticosteroids, although there have not been any studies to
determine the efficacy and optimal dosing regimen for these treatments. Triancinolone is probably the most common used intralesional
corticosteroid, often at a strength of 5 mg/mL or less . Tacrolimus, pimecrolimus, imiquimod, cryotherapy and simple excision are other
reported treatments to localized lesions . For generalized, severe and recalcitrant forms, other treatments have been proposed with variable
success and have included dapsone, clofazimine, niacinamide, potassium iodide, antimalarial drugs, cyclosporine, electrodessication and
x-ray therapy . Fumarinic acid esters show immunomodulatory activity and affect lymphocytes, dendritic cells and endothelial cell. These
effects are thought to be important to the improvement of disseminated GA . Chemophototherapy is another option to treat disseminated GA.
Although its mechanism of action is unclear, one possibility is selective elimination of the cells that are responsible for initiating the
disease . Due to its proliferative and inhibitory effects on collagen synthesis, retinoids have also been reported as a possible treatment .
Methotrexate, regarding its anti-proliferative and, mainly, anti-inflammatory properties, may effectively decrease granulomatous
inflammation in GA, and therefore could be another possible choice . More recently, vitamin E and anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α therapy
were pointed as possible therapies to disseminated GA . Vitamin E modulates inflammatory reactions via reduction of leucocyte recruitment,
modulation of nuclear factor kB signaling and decreasing the secretion of interleukin-1b . The efficacy of anti-TNF-α agents is thought to
be related to the potentially critical role of TNF-α which is abundantly found in the sera and skin of patients with disseminated GA .
Despite being a very rare subtype of a common disease, perforating granuloma annulare has clinical and histopathological characteristic
features that facilitate the differential diagnosis, avoiding unnecessary procedures and inadequate and potentially more invasive
treatments. All the authors completely involved in all aspects of researching, writing and editing the manuscript. The authors declare no
conflict of interest.
