Aggressive digital papillary adenocarcinoma (ADPA) is a rare sweat gland tumor that is found on the fingers, toes, and the digits. To date,
<100 cases have been reported in the literature. Apart from 1 case reported in the thigh, all of them were on digital or nondigital acral
skin. A 67-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to the hospital due to a mass on the scalp. This lesion was present for almost a year. It
was a semimobile cyctic mass that elevated the scalp. There was no change in the skin color. Its dimensions were 1.5 × 1 × 0.6 cm. The
laboratory, clinic, and radiologic findings (head x-ray) of the patient were normal. It was evaluated as a benign lesion such as lipoma or
epidermal cyst by a surgeon due to a small semimobile mass and no erosion of the skull. It was excised by a local surgery excision. The
result of the pathologic examination was aggressive papillary adenocarcinoma. This diagnosis is synonymous with ADPA. In our case,
localization was scalp. This localization is the first for this tumor in the literature. In addition, another atypical localization of this
tumor (ADPA) is thigh in the literature. This case was presented due to both the rare and atypical localizations. That is why, in our
opinion, revision of “digital” term in ADPA is necessary due to seem in atypical localizations like thigh and scalp. Sweat gland carcinomas
are rare malignant tumors of the skin. The well-defined entities porocarcinoma, microcystic adnexal carcinoma, aggressive digital papillary
adenocarcinoma (ADPA), mucinous eccrine carcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, spiradenocarcinoma, cylindrocarcinoma, and hidradenocarcinoma
are described. In 1979 Helwig from the Armed Force Institute of Pathology introduced a term called aggressive digital papillary adenoma and
presented 22 cases under this term at the American Academy of Clinical and Pathologic Conference in Chicago ADPA first described by Helwig
in 1984 and later by Kao GF in 1987. ADPAs are characterized by lesions on the fingers, toes, and the digits. These tumors are capable of
aggressive local invasion resulting in a high recurrence rate. As the tumor is slow-growing, painless, and clinically inconspicuous, the
diagnosis is often missed or delayed. The lesion is serious but often overlooked because it is confused clinically with benign and
nontumorous entities. ADPA is characterized by aggressive biological behavior, with a relatively high potential for local recurrence (30–40%
of cases) and distant metastasis (up to 14%). Complete surgical excision is the treatment of choice for ADPA; however, there are no uniform
diagnostic guidelines or recognized effective treatments for metastasis, and no therapeutic targets have been identified. Despite documented
spread to regional lymph nodes, the information on sentinel lymph node status in ADPA is reported infrequently, with only 1 documented case
of positive findings. Less than 100 cases have been reported. The majority of these cases are described in males in their fifth to seventh
decade. The median age of occurrence is 52 years. It is rare in females with male:female ratio of 9:1. Histologically ADPA has solid and
cystic spaces, with or without papillary projections in the cystic spaces. The cysts are formed either by central degeneration/necrosis of
solid areas or amassed secretory material, which appeared to be mucin. Tumor features include a grenz zone, fibrocollagenous stroma, a mixed
tubuloalveolar and papillary pattern, and focal squamous metaplasia. The differential diagnosis comprises apocrine adenocarcinoma, adenoid
cystic carcinoma of the sweat glands, and mucinous eccrine carcinoma. A 67-year-old Caucasian woman admitted to hospital due to a mass on
the scalp. This lesion was present for almost a year. It was a semimobile cyctic mass that elevated the scalp. There was no change in the
skin color. Its dimensions were 1.5 × 1 × 0.6 cm. The laboratory, clinic, and radiologic findings (head x ray) of the patient were normal.
It was evaluated a benign lesion such as lipoma or epidermal cyst by surgeon due to a small semimobile mass and no erosion of the skull. It
was excised by a local surgery excision. The skin is sent as a different part from this excision material. In pathological examination,
there were solid and cystic spaces including tubuloalveolar, ductal, and papillary structures protruding into cistically dilated lumina
(Fig. 1). These structures were lined by atypical epithelial cells including hyperchromatic, pleomorfic, and big nucleus (Fig. 2). Necrotic
areas and mitotic figures were present (Fig. 3). There was no epithelial invasion. Solid and cystic spaces including tubuloalveolar, ductal,
and papillary structures protruding into cistically dilated lumina (HE× 100). Atypical epithelial cells including hyperchromatic,
pleomorfic, and big nucleus (HE× 400). Necrotic areas (HE× 400). These histopathologic findings were compatible with ADPA. For elimination
of a metastatic primary papillary carcinoma focus such as lung, breast, thyroid, etc. An immunohistochemical study was performed. EMA,
PanCK, and CEA were positive. SMA, Calponin, and P63 were negative. These immunohistochemical dyes support diagnosis of ADPA. In the
examination for elimination of probably a metastatic focus, TTF1 for lung, ER and PR for breast, CK19 and HBME1 for thyroid, and GFAP for
brain were negative. In clinical investigation before pathologic report for the ADPA, it is approved that there was not any mass in lung,
breast, thyroid, brain, and ovary. The patient is in the 4th month in the postoperative period and there was no pathologic finding. Is ADPA
really aggressive? Does it only occur at digital location? Does it always have microscopic papillary features? Is it really adenocarcinoma?
This kind of lesion must have in summary, the so-called ADPA is not an aggressive tumor. Although most if not all cases reported on digital
or nondigital acral skin in the literature were from, there is no reason to believe that this kind of lesion only occurs on digits or is
restricted to acral skin. Almost 100 cases have been reported in the literature. Apart from 1 case reported in the thigh, all of them were
on digital or nondigital acral skin. In our case, localization was scalp. This localization is the first for this tumor in the literature.
In addition, another atypical localization of this tumor (ADPA) is thigh as reported in the literature. According to Sheng Chen and Masoud
Asgari, it does not always have microscopic papillary feature and furthermore it might be adenomyoepithelial tumor rather than
adenocarcinoma. Thus, the so-called aggressive digital papillary adenocarcinoma is not really ADPA. Even according to Duke et al, the
typical ADPA is “multinodular, solid, and cystic with papillary projections present in the cystic spaces. Twelve (18%) of the neoplasms were
essentially only solid, lacking cystic spaces. Characteristic of all lesions was a pattern of fused back-to-back glands lined by cuboidal to
low columnar epithelial cells in the solid portion of the tumors.” In our case SMA and Calponin were negative. Although this condition
supports malignity, it is not exact. Because the presence of SMA-positive and Calponin-positive myoepithelial cells around glandular
structures has been thought of as a feature of benignity in the context of cutaneous adnexal tumors. In some primary cutaneous mucinous
carcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, and adenomyoepithelial carcinoma (also called malignant adenomyoepithelioma), myoepithelial layer might
be found. In primary cutaneous mucinous carcinoma, histologically, an in situ component in the form of epithelial islands bounded by a
myoepithelial layer, and highlighted by CK 5/6, p53, calponin and SMA, is frequently present in PCMC in comparison to metastatic mucinous
carcinoma. In adenoid cystic carcinoma, inconstant expression of actin was described previously, which is possibly an indication of the
presence of a myoepithelial cell population. In adenomyoepithelial carcinoma (also called malignant adenomyoepithelioma),
immunohistochemical staining was done and clearly showed the presence of both epithelial and myoepithelial cells. The presence of tumor-
associated myoepithelial cells should not be construed as an indication of benignity but rather another indication for a primary adnexal
tumor should metastasis be a clinical or diagnostic consideration. The presence of tumor-associated myoepithelial cells histologically and
immunohistochemically was not synonymous with benignity. As the name implies a malignant neoplasm, the rubric “aggressive” is unnecessary.
The differential diagnosis of ADPA comprises apocrine adenocarcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma of the sweat glands, and mucinous eccrine
carcinoma. Microscopic features were distinct from those of other eccrine sweat gland tumors and often led to the diagnosis of such
metastatic carcinoma as that of the breast, lung, thyroid, and ovary. The characteristic histologic features of ADPA included tubuloalveolar
and ductal structures with areas of papillary projections protruding into cystic lumina. The stroma varied from thin, fibrous septae to
areas of dense, hyalinized collagen. In our case, in the pathological examination, there were solid and cystic spaces including
tubuloalveolar, ductal, and papillary structures protruding into cistically dilated lumina. These structures were lined by atypical
epithelial cells including hyperchromatic, pleomorfic, and big nucleus. Necrotic areas and mitotic figures were present. These findings were
typically aggressive digital papillary adenocarcinoma. There were not apparent apocrine cells in our case; thus, apocrine adenocarcinoma was
not though. In adenoid cystic carcinoma of the sweat glands and mucinous eccrine carcinoma, apparent papillary projections were not
available. Thus, adenoid cystic carcinoma of the sweat glands and mucinous eccrine carcinoma were not though due to apparent papillary
projections were avaliable in our case. Metastatic papillary carcinoma to skin from breast, lung, thyroid, and ovary should be considered
when the pathologic report is prepared. The immunohistochemical panel was supported to distinguish the aggressive digital papillary
adenocarcinomas from metastatic malignities. In addition, it is approved that there was no mass in lung, breast, thyroid, brain, ovary, and
elsewhere. ADPA are rare sweat gland tumors. They were found on the fingers, toes, and the digits. Almost 100 cases have been reported in
the literature. Apart from 1 case reported in the thigh, all of them were reported on digital or nondigital acral skin. In our case,
localization was scalp. In the literature, this localization is the first for this tumor. This case was presented due to this condition.
That is why, in our opinion, revision of “digitally” term in ADPA is necessary due to seem in atypical localizations such as thigh and
scalp. The authors thank to the editor of The American Journal of Dermatopathology for suggested a convenient journal to us manuscript.
Abbreviation: ADPA = aggressive digital papillary adenocarcinoma. Concept/design of the study—MGB, MT, AND; data
analysis/interpretation—MGB, MT; laboratory experiments—MGB, MT, AND; data collection—MGB, MT, AND, OC, HE; drafting article—MGB; and
critical revision of the article—MGB, MT, AND, OC. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose. The ethical approval
and patient consent were not necessary due to it was a case report.
