In patients with left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC), implantation of a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) may be performed as a
bridge to transplantation. In this respect, the particular characteristics of the left ventricular myocardium may represent a challenge. We
report a patient with LVNC who required urgent heart transplantation for inflow cannula obstruction nine months after receiving a LVAD. LVAD
parameters, echocardiography and examination of the explanted heart suggested changes of left ventricular configuration brought about by
LVAD support as the most likely cause of inflow cannula obstruction. We conclude that changes experienced by non-compacted myocardium during
LVAD support may give rise to inflow cannula obstruction and flow reduction. Presence of LVNC mandates tight surveillance for changes in LV
configuration and LVAD flow characteristics and may justify urgent transplantation listing status. Left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) is
attributed to arrest of normal embryogenesis of the endocardium and myocardium and results in a two-layered structure of the left ventricle
(LV). In addition to a compacted outer layer, the LV comprises a spongy non-compacted inner layer with heavy trabeculation and deep
intertrabecular recesses [1, 2]. Though its incidence and prevalence are still uncertain, LVNC was recently suggested to represent the third
most commonly diagnosed cardiomyopathy . The major clinical findings in LVNC are heart failure, arrhythmias and thromboembolic events [1,
2]. In patients with end-stage heart failure, LVAD implantation may be performed as a bridge to transplantation . While previous authors
focused on thromboembolic events [5, 7] and arrhythmia associated with LVAD support in LVNC, the changes non-compacted left ventricular
myocardium may experience during LVAD support also merit investigation. Our case sheds light on LVAD support in LVNC from a different angle
and raises questions with regard to the duration of support being likely to be limited by support-induced changes of non-compacted
myocardium, LV configuration and LVAD flow behaviour. A 35-year-old male with LVNC underwent off-pump LVAD implantation (HVAD, HeartWare
Inc.) through a minimally invasive access. Presence of trabeculation obstructing the inflow cannula was excluded by digital exploration
before introduction of the LVAD. Correct inflow cannula position and absence of obstruction were additionally verified by transesophageal
echocardiography and evaluation of LVAD flow behaviour before closure. After an uneventful hospital stay and subsequent exercise tolerance
and quality of life improvement, the patient presented with low flow alarms and had his LVAD speed re-adjusted several times. After nine
months, he was readmitted for perilously low flows that intermittently dropped to 500 ml/min. This was interpreted as the consequence of an
excess of outdoor activity and volume depletion, and when LVAD flows increased satisfactorily after administration of fluids, the patient
was discharged the next day. Subsequently, LVAD flows kept dropping intermittently over a few weeks, and finally the patient ceased to
respond to administration of fluids and developed signs of heart failure. He was re-admitted, and his waiting list status was set to high
urgency. After four weeks of medical treatment, he was put on extracorporeal life support (ECLS). By that time, changes in LV configuration
had come to be suspected as the cause of LVAD dysfunction. Echocardiography showed the LV cavity smaller and the LV walls thicker than
before LVAD implantation, with heavy trabeculation within the LV and a solid structure appearing to cross in front of the inflow cannula
opening (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Transthoracic echocardiography 9 months after LVAD implantation: a short axis view showing trabeculated left
ventricular myocardium; b tilted short axis view showing a solid structure stretching across the LV in front of the LVAD inflow cannula
(arrow), c parasternal long axis view showing thick, spongy LV myocardium and narrow LV cavity, d inverted tilted four chamber view showing
thickened LV myocardium with small LV cavity appearing divided by a solid structure Transthoracic echocardiography 9 months after LVAD
implantation: a short axis view showing trabeculated left ventricular myocardium; b tilted short axis view showing a solid structure
stretching across the LV in front of the LVAD inflow cannula (arrow), c parasternal long axis view showing thick, spongy LV myocardium and
narrow LV cavity, d inverted tilted four chamber view showing thickened LV myocardium with small LV cavity appearing divided by a solid
structure After 45 days on ECLS, the patient underwent heart transplantation. Macroscopic examination of the explanted heart confirmed the
findings on echocardiography. The LV cavity was narrow and partially obliterated by dense tissue. In particular, there was a rigid
trabecular structure stretching across the LV in front of and appearing to have overgrown the LVAD inflow cannula. The left ventricular wall
showed massive thickening to nearly 30 mm, with the myocardium spongy and interspersed with yellowish fatty deposits (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Heart
explanted after nine months of LVAD support: a HVAD inflow cannula protruding into massively enlarged heart, b trabeculated tissue
surrounding the inflow cannula, c dense stretch of trabeculated tissue obstructing the opening of the inflow cannula within partially
obliterated apex, d thick, spongy myocardium interspersed with fatty deposits Heart explanted after nine months of LVAD support: a HVAD
inflow cannula protruding into massively enlarged heart, b trabeculated tissue surrounding the inflow cannula, c dense stretch of
trabeculated tissue obstructing the opening of the inflow cannula within partially obliterated apex, d thick, spongy myocardium interspersed
with fatty deposits LVNC was found to lead to severe heart failure in a considerable share of those diagnosed with the condition, with 47 %
and 60 % reported to have either died or undergone transplantation within a mean follow-up period of 44 ± 40 months and within 6 years of
diagnosis, respectively. Nevertheless, reports on VAD implantation in patients with LVNC are infrequent, especially when those featuring
pediatric patients supported with pulsatile systems are left aside (Table 1).Table 1Outcomes of LVAD implantation in patients with left
ventricular non-compactionNo.PatientsDeviceDuration of supportComplicationsOutcomeMaile et al., 2004 1Male, 51 yearsDeBakey MicroMed
LVAD2.5 monthsNoneSuccessfully bridged to transplantationIvan et al., 2005 2Male, 21 yearsJarvik biventricular assist deviceNot indicatedNot
indicatedDeath before transplantationMale, 37 yearsThoratec RVAD andHeartMate LVADNot indicatedNot indicatedDeath after
transplantationNathan et al., 2010 1Male, 14 yearsAbiomed, biventricular assist device5 daysNoneSuccessfully bridged to
transplantationNinios et al., 2010 1Male, 28 yearsJarvik 2000 LV3 yearsRecurrent thrombosis with successful intravenous lysisPatient on LVAD
support at the date of publicationHanke et al., 2012 1Male, 12 monthsBerlin Heart, Excor, biventricular assist device24 daysPulmonary
haemorrhage requiring use of a membrane oxygenator, thrombosis requiring replacement of the LVADSuccessfully bridged to transplantationSiehr
et al., 2013 1Male, 6 weeksBerlin Heart, Excor, LVAD56 daysEmbolic cerebrovascular accident, 2 pump exchanges due to clot
formationSuccessfully bridged to transplantationUribarri et al., 2015 54 males (23, 25, 43,54 years)1 female (24 years)3 HVAD2 HeartMate
IIMean follow up period 86.5 weeks, range 40–194 weeks4 cases of pump thrombosis in 3 of 5 patients2 deaths, 3 patients on LVAD support at
the date of publication Outcomes of LVAD implantation in patients with left ventricular non-compaction Ninios et al. reported off-pump
implantation of a Jarvik 2000 LV via a left posterolateral thoracotomy, while Maile et al. described a case of implantation of a DeBakey
LVAD in a patient with LVNC. 5 patients reported by Uribarri et al. underwent on-pump HeartMate II implantation through a full sternotomy or
on-pump HVAD implantation through an upper hemisternotomy and left-sided anterolateral thoracotomy. In this series, thrombosis was the main
issue, with arrhythmia investigated as a second outcome parameter . In the case reported by Ninios et al., the focus was also on the
association between LVNC and pump thrombosis . The patient reported by Maile et al. underwent transplantation after 2.5 months of uneventful
LVAD support, and Ivan et al. reported two cases that took a fatal course after biventricular assist devices were implanted as a last
remedy. In none of the cases published to date, however, mention was made of complications resulting from the particular structure of the
left ventricular myocardium in patients with LVNC even though some of the patients were on LVAD support for considerably longer periods than
our patient [5, 7] and Uribarri et al. explicitly reported the apex to be the region that was most frequently affected by non-compaction in
their patients. The latter finding is in keeping with previous literature reporting the typical features of LVNC to be located predominantly
in the apical and mid-ventricular segments of the LV , which is relevant in that trabecular structures within a nearly obliterated apex may
result in obstruction of the inflow cannula. In this respect, the implantation method may be of relevance, because on-pump implantation
allows more thorough inspection and palpation of the left ventricle in order to exclude presence of or remove apical trabecular structures
that may result in obstruction of the inflow cannula. In our case, off-pump HVAD implantation was uncomplicated, obstruction of the inflow
cannula by apical trabecular structures was excluded by digital palpation as well as by transesophageal echocardiography, and unhindered
blood flow into the inflow cannula was reflected by normal LVAD flow characteristics. In hindsight, however, on-pump implantation would have
allowed not only inspection of the left ventricular apex, but also excision of excess tissue. On the other hand, the fact that first signs
of inflow cannula obstruction occurred after several months of uneventful support and absence, in earlier echocardiographic examinations, of
the heavy apical and mid-ventricular trabecular masses seen on echocardiography after readmission for LVAD dysfunction suggest that at least
part of the changes that finally resulted in inflow cannula obstruction must have occurred over time. While decompression of the LV is a
normal and desirable consequence of LV unloading, the extreme degree of narrowing of the LV cavity we saw in the explanted heart as well as
the heavy mass of rigid trabeculated tissue around the inflow cannula represent unusual findings. They are most likely explained by LV
configuration and the geometry and density of pre-existing trabeculated tissue having changed in response to the hemodynamic changes that
were brought about by LVAD support. We conclude that LVNC may turn out to be a cause of inflow cannula obstruction and flow reduction even
where LVAD function was normal upon implantation. On-pump implantation may be advisable with a view to inspecting the inflow opening and
excising excess tissue, thus preventing subsequent catastrophic inflow obstruction. LVNC requires a high index of suspicion and mandates
tight surveillance of LVAD flow characteristics and LV configuration. If LVNC actually turns out to be a limiting factor in LVAD therapy, it
may justify more liberal access to high urgency listing for patients afflicted with this particular condition. ECLS, extracorporeal life
support; HVAD, left ventricular assist device supplied by HeartWare Inc; LV, left ventricle, left ventricular; LVAD, left ventricular assist
device; LVNC, left ventricular non compaction; VAD, ventricular assist device We thank the physicians of the intensive care unit for the
care they provided for the patient. The authors have received no funding for the preparation of this paper. KA conceived the design of the
project, collected and interpreted the data and images and drafted the manuscript. RP, SUA and BFA were involved in the surgical treatment
and intensive care of the patient, have critically revised the manuscript and contributed to interpreting the data. BFA gave final approval
of the version to be published. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
