Asparagine synthetase deficiency (OMIM# 615574) is a very rare newly described neurometabolic disorder characterized by congenital
microcephaly and severe global developmental delay, associated with intractable seizures or hyperekplexia. Brain MRI typically shows
cerebral atrophy with simplified gyral pattern and delayed myelination. Only 12 cases have been described to date. The disease is caused by
homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the ASNS gene on chromosome 7q21. Family 1 is a multiplex consanguineous family with five
affected members, while Family 2 is simplex. One affected from each family was available for detailed phenotyping. Both patients (Patients 1
and 2) presented at birth with microcephaly and severe hyperekplexia, and were found to have gross brain malformation characterized by
simplified gyral pattern, and hypoplastic cerebellum and pons. EEG showed no epileptiform discharge in Patient 2 but multifocal discharges
in patient 1. Patient 2 is currently four years old with severe neurodevelopmental delay, quadriplegia and cortical blindness. Whole exome
sequencing (WES) revealed a novel homozygous mutation in ASNS (NM_001178076.1) in each patient (c.970C > T:p.(Arg324*) and
c.944A > G:p.(Tyr315Cys)). Our results expand the mutational spectrum of the recently described asparagine synthetase deficiency and show a
remarkable clinical homogeneity among affected individuals, which should facilitate its recognition and molecular confirmation for pertinent
and timely genetic counseling. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12883-016-0633-0) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users. Asparagine synthetase deficiency (ASNSD, OMIM# 615574) is a very rare newly described autosomal recessive
neurometabolic disorder, caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the ASNS gene on chromosome 7q21 . The phenotype is
characterized by microcephaly, severely delayed psychomotor development, progressive encephalopathy, cortical atrophy with reduced cerebral
volume and enlarged lateral ventricles (associated in some with cerebellar and pontine hypoplasia, simplified gyral pattern, cortical
dysgenesis and delayed myelination), intractable seizures or hyperekplexic activity, appendicular hypertonia and hyperreflexia . Other
associated features include micrognathia, receding forehead, relatively large ears, axial hypotonia and cortical blindness. To the best of
our knowledge, only 12 patients were described in the literature including the nine original patients reported by Ruzzo et al. from four
families of Iranian Jewish, French Canadian, and Bangladeshi origins, two of whom were consanguineous. Two patients were subsequently
reported by Alfadhel et al. from Saudi Arabia, and another reported by Ben-Salem et al. from United Arab Emirates, all born to
consanguineous parents (Table 1).Table 1Clinical features of cases with asparagine synthetase deficiency due to ASNS gene mutationPresent
reportRuzzo et al. Ben Salem et al. Alfadhel et al. Patient 1Patient 2Number of pts2912Number of families2411Age1 month4 Yrs9 month–14 Yrs5
Yrs2 Yrs/4 YrsGenderMM8M/1FM1M/1FEthnic originArabArabIranian Jews, FrenchArabArabCanadian, BangladeshiConsanguinityYesYesYes in two
familiesYesYesMutation in ASNS genec.1219C > Tc.944A > Gc. 1084T > G(p.Phe 362Valc. 1193 A > C p.Y 398 Cc. 1160A > Gp.(Arg407)p.Y 315 Cc.
1648C > T(p.Arg 550Cysp. Tyr 377Cysc 17C > A(p. A6EType of mutationNonsense homozygousMissense, homozygousMissense, homozygous, compound
heterozygousMissense, homozygousMissense, homozygousDevelopmental delaySevereSevereSevereSevereHead circumference (cm )at
birth292928.5–3329.530 and 26.5HypertoniaNoYesYesYesYesSpastic quadriplegiaNoYesYesYesYesSeizureYesNo6 patientsYesYes,
bothHyperekplexiaYesYesThree patientsNoNoEEG PatternEpileptic encephalopathy in a transitional phase with predominant SZ burdensLow
amplitude bilaterally but no clear epileptiform discharge• Disorganized background In hyperekplexia cases• Hypsarrhythmia• Suppression
burstAbnormal background activity bilaterally, low amplitude and frequent interictal multifocal spikeMultiple independent spike fociMRI
BrainMicrocephaly, smooth thin cerebral cortex, simplified gyral pattern, global brain atrophy, delayed myelination, hypoplastic cerebellum
and ponsMicrocephaly, smooth thin cerebral cortex, simplified gyral pattern, global brain atrophy, delayed myelination, hypoplastic
cerebellum and ponsAll have severe microcephaly, brain atrophy delayed myelination, decreased size of the pons and simplified gyral
patternSevere microcephaly thin corpus callosum, ventriculomegaly, brain atrophy, decreased size of pons, simplified gyral patternBoth
severe microcephaly brain atrophy, delayed myelination and simplified gyral pattern Abbreviations: M male, F female, Yrs years, EEG
electroencephalography, MRI magnetic resonance image Clinical features of cases with asparagine synthetase deficiency due to ASNS gene
mutation Abbreviations: M male, F female, Yrs years, EEG electroencephalography, MRI magnetic resonance image In this report, we describe
two additional cases from Saudi Arabia belonging to two consanguineous families, with typical clinical and radiological features of ASNSD.
The diagnosis was confirmed by whole exome sequencing (WES), which revealed two novel mutations in the ASNS gene. This is the fourth ASNSD
report in the literature. The proband (Fig. 1, V: 2) is 1-month-old Saudi boy born normally at term to first 24-year- old parents. Four
maternal aunts (Fig. 1, IV: 1, 4, 7, 8.) had died at the age of four, five, three and six weeks respectively, in a remote medical facility
with no available records. However, all are said to have presented with microcephaly and abnormal movements similar to the index (see
below). The mother was G2P1 (IUFD at 28 weeks gestation) +0. No history of exposures. Antenatal ultrasound (US) scan showed microcephaly.
Apgar score was 9 and 10 at one and five minutes, respectively. Birth weight 2675gm (10th percentile), head circumference 29 cm (−3SD).
Examination showed microcephaly, sloping forehead, short neck, and micrognathia (Fig. 2a). Shortly after birth, he developed abnormal
movements in the form of bursts of tonic/clonic movements provoked by non-habituating glabellar and root of the nose tapping, sound and
light (see Additional files 1, 2 and 3). There was hyperreflexia, hypertonia and arthrogryposis of the lower limbs. He developed frequent
apneas necessitating mechanical ventilation. Treatment with clonazepam was initiated and later phenobarbitone was added to control the
abnormal movements. Laboratory investigations (Table 2) showed normal metabolic screen including plasma and CSF asparagine, glutamine,
aspartate and glutamate.CSF neurotransmitters, 5HIAA, 3-OMD, and HVA were normal. Brain MRI (Fig. 3) revealed cerebral atrophy, simplified
gyral pattern and hypoplastic cerebellum and pons. EEG showed multifocal discharges, fast spiking in the left hemisphere favoring cortical
dysplasia, and frontal spikes. The findings favor epileptic encephalopathy in a transitional phase with predominant seizure burdens. Whole
exome sequence (WES) revealed nonsense mutation in the ASNS gene, (NM_001178076.1: c.970C > T p. (Arg324*). He died at the age of six weeks
in status epilepticus.Fig. 1Pedigrees of the two study families. The sequence chromatograms of the mutant alleles are shown below the
respective pedigreesFig. 2 a Photograph of patient 1 showing microcephaly, slopingforehead, micrognathia, and relatively large ears. b
Photograph of patient 2 at age of four years. Note microcephaly, relatively large ears, sloping forehead, and severe contractures of all
limbs (spastic quadriplegic posture)Table 2Biochemical findings in patient 1TestPlasmaReference rangeCerebrospinal fluidReference
rangeAsparagine (μ mol/L)5525–9150–12Glutamine (μ mol/L)834316–1020639232–725Glutamic acid (μ mol/L)12531–20220–27Aspartic acid (μ
mol/L)332–20<10–3CSF Neurotransmitters 5-hydoxyindoleacetic acid(5HIAA) (n mol/L)281Newborn (208–1159) Homovanillic acid (HVA) (n
mol/L)410Newborn (337–1299) 3-O-methyldopa (3-OMD) (n mol/L)79Newborn (0–300) Urine organic acidNormalFig. 3Brain MR images at day 1 after
birth of patient 1. a Sagittal T1-weighted image showing severe microcephaly, simplified gyral pattern, thin corpus callosum, small
cerebellum, and small pons. b Axial T1-weighted image demonstrating small pons and cerebellum. c Axial T1-weighted image showing delayed
myelination of the posterior limb of internal capsule, bilaterally. d Coronal FLAIR image demonstrating severely simplified gyral pattern
and large extra-axial CSF spaces reflecting brain underdevelopment. e Proton MR Spectroscopy with long TE showing normal spectra for age
Pedigrees of the two study families. The sequence chromatograms of the mutant alleles are shown below the respective pedigrees a Photograph
of patient 1 showing microcephaly, slopingforehead, micrognathia, and relatively large ears. b Photograph of patient 2 at age of four years.
Note microcephaly, relatively large ears, sloping forehead, and severe contractures of all limbs (spastic quadriplegic posture) Biochemical
findings in patient 1 Brain MR images at day 1 after birth of patient 1. a Sagittal T1-weighted image showing severe microcephaly,
simplified gyral pattern, thin corpus callosum, small cerebellum, and small pons. b Axial T1-weighted image demonstrating small pons and
cerebellum. c Axial T1-weighted image showing delayed myelination of the posterior limb of internal capsule, bilaterally. d Coronal FLAIR
image demonstrating severely simplified gyral pattern and large extra-axial CSF spaces reflecting brain underdevelopment. e Proton MR
Spectroscopy with long TE showing normal spectra for age Is a 4- year-old Saudi boy delivered normally at term to a 23-year-old primigravida
lady and her 25-year-old first cousin husband (Fig. 1, IV:1). Antenatal US scan revealed microcephaly but pregnancy was uneventful
otherwise. Apgar score was 9 and 10 at one and five minutes, respectively. Birth weight 2790 gm (25th percentile), length 51 cm (50th
percentile) and head circumference 30 cm (−2.6SD). He was admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) because of microcephaly and
abnormal movements. Clinical examination showed microcephaly, staring anxious look, sloping forehead, receding chin and relatively large
ears. Neurological examination revealed tonic/clonic rapid movements of both upper and lower limbs, with positive head retraction reflex
(HRR). The attacks were provoked by glabellar and tip of the nose tapping, were non-habituating and precipitated by sounds. Additional files
4, 5, and 6 show this in more detail. Hypertonia with exaggerated reflexes and arthrogryposis of both upper and lower limbs were also noted.
The rest of the systemic examination revealed no abnormality. He was initially managed by phenobarbitone. Clonazepam and levetiracetam were
later added due to the intractable movements. At the age of four years he was found to have profound global developmental delay and spastic
quadriplegia with severe contractures of both upper and lower limbs (Fig. 2b). He also had cortical blindness and hyperekplexic activities
could still be elicited by glabellar and root of the nose tapping, light and sounds [see Additional files 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6]. His growth
parameters were severely retarded: his weight 5.3 Kg (−6.8SD) and head circumference was 35 cm (−10.1SD). Laboratory tests including
hematologic indices, renal function, liver function, and electrolytes were all normal. Metabolic screen, plasma amino acids, lactate, and
ammonia were unremarkable. Chromosome study revealed normal male karyotype. MRI brain (Fig. 4) showed microcephaly, thin and smooth cortex
with simplified gyral pattern , delayed myelination, dilatation of the ventricles, global brain atrophy and hypoplastic cerebellum and pons.
EEG showed very low amplitude bilaterally without epileptiform discharges. Only sporadic sharp transient spikes, most likely myogenic in
origin, were noted. Genetic testing, utilizing whole exome sequencing (WES), showed a novel homozygous ASNS gene mutation: NM_001178076.1,
missense c.944A > G, p. (Tyr315Cys). Both parents are heterozygous carriers. This change was absent in 615 in-house Saudi exomes, and is
predicted pathogenic by PolyPhen (0.992), SIFT (1.0) and CADD (28.7) . The family was offered genetic counselling.Fig. 4MRI brain at the age
of 3 weeks. a Sagittal T1-weighted image showing severe microcephaly with overlapped lambdoid sutures, brain underdevelopment evident by
simplified gyral pattern, small cerebellum, and small pons. b Axial FLAIR image revealing small pons and cerebellum. c Axial T1-weighted
image demonstrating delayed myelination evident by absent myelination of the posterior limb of internal capsule, bilaterally. d Coronal
T2-weighted image showing simplified gyral pattern (more in the frontal lobes) and large extra-axial CSF spaces due to brain
underdevelopment MRI brain at the age of 3 weeks. a Sagittal T1-weighted image showing severe microcephaly with overlapped lambdoid sutures,
brain underdevelopment evident by simplified gyral pattern, small cerebellum, and small pons. b Axial FLAIR image revealing small pons and
cerebellum. c Axial T1-weighted image demonstrating delayed myelination evident by absent myelination of the posterior limb of internal
capsule, bilaterally. d Coronal T2-weighted image showing simplified gyral pattern (more in the frontal lobes) and large extra-axial CSF
spaces due to brain underdevelopment We report two novel mutations in the ASNS gene in two Saudi patients from first cousin marriages who
presented with congenital microcephaly, hyperekplexia, cerebral atrophy, simplified gyral pattern, and hypoplastic cerebellum and pons
(Figs. 3 and 4). The phenotype is consistent with the recently described ASNSD (OMIM# 615574). ASNS encodes an asparagine synthetase enzyme
involved in the synthesis of asparagine from glutamine and aspartate . The neurological impairment resulting from ASNS mutation can be
explained by asparagine depletion in the brain or by accumulation of aspartate /glutamate leading to enhanced excitation and neuronal damage
. To date five pathogenic mutations in the ASNS gene have been identified (Table 1). All cases of asparagine synthetase deficiency were
diagnosed by molecular genetics as there is no reliable biochemical test for diagnosing the disorder. Alfadhel et al. reported low levels of
asparagine in the CSF of two siblings with ASNSD confirmed by molecular genetics, while Ruzzo et al. reported low asparagine levels in the
CSF of only two of the five patients with the disorder. Our two patients had normal plasma and CSF asparagine, glutamine, aspartate, and
glutamate and CSF neurotransmitters (Table 2). Therefore, this condition cannot be ruled out by normal plasma and CSF asparagine, aspartate
and glutamate levels (Table 3) in a patient presenting with congenital microcephaly, and unexplained encephalopathy in the form of
intractable seizures or hyperekplexia .Table 3Biochemical Findings in ASNSDPlasmaCerebrospinal fluid (CSF)Asparagine μmol/LGlutamine μmol
/LAspartate μmol /LGlutamate μmol /LAsparagine μmol /LGlutamine μmol /LAspartate μmol /LGlutamate μmol /LCommentA. Present Report
(2015) Patient 155 (25–91)834 (316–1020)33 (2–20)125 (31–202)5 (0–12)639 (232–725)<1 (0–3)2 (0–27)Slightly Elevated Plasma Aspartate Patient
2NormalNormalNormalNormalN/AN/AN/AN/AB. Majid Alfadhel et. al (2014) Patient 110 (33–68.4)339 (254–823)N/AN/ANot detected (1.1–6.9)922
(356–680)N/AN/ALow Plasma and CSF Asparagine Patient 26 (33–68.4)328 (254–823)N/AN/A1 (1.1–6.9)574 (356–680)N/AN/ALow Plasma and CSF
AsparagineC. Ruzzo el. al (2013) 157 (23–112)1250 (254–823)18 (1–24)N/AN/AN/AN/AN/AHigh Plasma Glutamate 249 (23–112)1149 (254–823)2
(1–24)N/AN/AN/AN/AN/AHigh Plasma Glutamate 3N/AN/A7 (17–21)N/AN/AN/AN/AN/ALow Plasma Aspartate 412 (16–21)N/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/ALow Plasma
Asparagine 5N/AN/A12 (0–20)N/AN/AN/AN/AN/A 611 (31–56)439 (474–736)7 (4–18)N/AN/AN/AN/AN/ALow Plasma Asparagine 755 (31–56)668 (474–736)9
(4–18)N/AN/AN/AN/AN/ABen-Salem et. al (2015)NormalNormalNormalNormalN/AN/AN/AN/ALegend: N/A Not Available Biochemical Findings in ASNSD
Legend: N/A Not Available ASNSD is a very rare disorder with a prevalence of <1/1000000 worldwide (ORPHA 391376); and hitherto, only 12
cases have been reported. We suspect this condition is underdiagnosed due to lack of recognition and the risk of confusing the hyperekplexia
phenotype for nonspecific neonatal epilepsy, and also due to lack of a specific laboratory test and the difficulty of performing molecular
genetic testing in suspected cases except in research centers or referral hospitals. Given that there is no reliable biochemical test,
sequencing of ASNS is the mainstay of diagnosis. While our two patients were diagnosed using WES, this gene can easily be targeted by Sanger
sequencing or added to a gene panel approach as described before . The clinical and radiographic presentation of our patients, namely
congenital microcephaly, hyperekplexia, brain malformation, and (in long term survivors) severe psychomotor retardation and cortical
blindness is identical to that observed in the patients reported by Ruzzo et al. with ASNS gene mutation. Interestingly, we previously
reported six patients with a similar presentation of hyperekplexia, microcephaly and brain malformations who later proved to have cathepsin
deficiency (CTSD) known to be associated with congenital ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal 10 (CLN 10) [9, 10]. Our observation raises the
intriguing possibility of a link between asparagine synthetase deficiency and cathepsin deficiency, although this will require future
research. Both disorders should be considered in microcephalic neonates who present with seizures or hyperekplexia at or before birth, and
molecular genetic testing needs to be performed for pertinent and timely genetic counseling. This will pave the way for adopting effective
preventive and therapeutic approaches like preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD), or early termination of affected pregnancies, which
helped many families in this region with high prevalence of autosomal recessive disorders . Therapeutic approach by supplementation with
asparagine in ASNSD seems attractive. However, the prenatal onset of the microcephaly and early postnatal presentation make such treatment
unlikely to be curative unless started prenatally . we expand the allelic heterogeneity of ASNSD and emphasize the clinical homogeneity of
this disorder. The remarkable clinical overlap with CTSD-related CLN10 makes it difficult to segregate the two disorders clinically and
highlights the need for ANSN and CTSD sequencing to make an accurate diagnosis. 3-OMD, 3-O-Methyldopa; 5HIAA, 5 hydroxy indole acetic acid;
ASNS, asparagine synthetase; ASNSD, asparagine synthetase deficiency; CLN, ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CTSD,
cathepsin D; EEG, electroencephalogram; HRR, head retraction reflex; HVA, homo vanillic acid; IUFD, intra uterine fetal death; MRI, magnetic
resonance image; NICU, neonatal intensive care unit; PGD, preimplantation genetic diagnosis; SD, standard deviation; US, ultrasound; WES,
whole exome sequence Additional file 1: MOV showing non-habituating glabellar and root of the nose tapping in patient 1 (Fig. 1,V.2). (MP4
9415 kb) Additional file 2: MOV shows exaggerated startle reflex to sounds in patient 1 (Fig. 1,V.2). (MP4 8851 kb) Additional file 3: MOV
shows exaggerated startle reflex to light in patient 1 (Fig. 1,V.2). (MP4 3117 kb) Additional file 4: MOV showing non-habituating glabellar
and root of the nose tapping in patient 2 (Fig. 1IV .1), in the first week of life. (MP4 3050 kb) Additional file 5: MOV shows exaggerated
startle reflex to sound in patient 2 (Fig. 1IV .1), at the age of 4 years. (MP4 3052 kb) Additional file 6: MOV shows exaggerated startle
reflex to light in patient 2 (Fig. 1IV .1), at the age of 4 years. (MP4 2722 kb) MOV showing non-habituating glabellar and root of the nose
tapping in patient 1 (Fig. 1,V.2). (MP4 9415 kb) MOV shows exaggerated startle reflex to sounds in patient 1 (Fig. 1,V.2). (MP4 8851 kb) MOV
shows exaggerated startle reflex to light in patient 1 (Fig. 1,V.2). (MP4 3117 kb) MOV showing non-habituating glabellar and root of the
nose tapping in patient 2 (Fig. 1IV .1), in the first week of life. (MP4 3050 kb) MOV shows exaggerated startle reflex to sound in patient 2
(Fig. 1IV .1), at the age of 4 years. (MP4 3052 kb) MOV shows exaggerated startle reflex to light in patient 2 (Fig. 1IV .1), at the age of
4 years. (MP4 2722 kb) The authors are grateful to the reported family for participation. We thank the Genotyping and Sequencing Core
Facilities at KFSHRC for their technical help. We also thank Mais Hashem, Firdous Abdulwahab and Niema Ibrahim, clinical research
coordinators, for their help in recruiting the two families. This work was supported by KCAST grant 13-BIO1113-20 (FSA) and King Salman
Center for Disability Research (FSA).Thanks are also due to Thamer Aloudah and Vir Salvador for medical illustration. M.A.S. was supported
by the Deanship of Scientific Research, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia through the research group project number RGP-VPP-301.
Data supporting our findings in this case report can be found in the Figs. 1, 2, 3 and 4, and Tables 1, 2 and 3 in the manuscript and
supplementary materials (Additional files 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6.Videos). MZS and MAS conceived of the study, and participated in its design
and coordination and drafted the manuscript. OBA, AS, K Al H, AMM. And, MSB, participated in management of patients and data analysis. MA,
and, RS, carried out the molecular genetic studies. IAA, studied the radiology, MMUK reported the EEG. FSA designed and coordinated the
molecular genetic studies and critically reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the guardians of both patients for publication of this
study and the accompanying images and videos. A copy of the written consents is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of BMC
Neurology, (Fig. 2a, b, Additional files 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6). The families were enrolled in the study,an informed written consent was used
to recruit the patients and their relatives (King Faisal Specialist Hospital and research Center IR13 approved research protocol.
