Conflict of Interest: None. An 86-year-old woman was referred for treatment of a lentigo maligna melanoma on the left earlobe, confirmed by
cutaneous biopsy. The resulting surgical defect involved the earlobe's full thickness. The authors outline a simple method for
reconstructing the entire lobe in one stage, without grafts, whilst offering a pleasant appearance. Earlobe deformity may be congenital or,
more often, acquired due to trauma, burns or surgery. Ear lobules are an important reference point for facial symmetry and they serve
decorative purposes like wearing earrings. Losing them represents an obvious aesthetic abnormality. Several methods developed to reconstruct
this deformity have presented various advantages and disadvantages. An 86-year-old woman was referred for treatment of a lentigo maligna
melanoma on the left earlobe, confirmed by cutaneous biopsy (Figure 1). There were no enlarged lymph nodes. The lesion was removed with 5mm
surgical margins. The resulting surgical defect involved the earlobe's full thickness (Figure 2). Figure 1Earlobe lentigo maligno melanoma
Earlobe lentigo maligno melanoma Figure 2Surgical defect compromising the entire earlobe Surgical defect compromising the entire earlobe The
authors outline a simple method for reconstructing the entire lobe in one stage, without grafts, whilst offering a pleasant appearance.
Surgery was performed under local anaesthesia (1% lidocaine without adrenaline). The tumor and a 5mm margin were excised, leaving a surgical
defect affecting the whole lobule (Figure 2). Since the patient had redundant skin in the preauricular area, the authors decided to use that
region for earlobe reconstruction. A superiorly based transposition flap, with the required dimensions to reach and cover the defect, was
marked in the preauricular area. To preserve the anatomy and symmetry, the amputated earlobe was used as a model to reconstruct the new
earlobe, providing the appropriate flap measurements. Its length corresponds to twice the width of the anterior surface of the lobule, plus
3-4mm to enable the flap to fold upon itself. Furthermore, its width is equal to 1-2 mm, plus the height of the lobule, to compensate for
expected flap contraction. The flap was raised and transposed to the recipient site (Figure 3); the lower part of this flap was fashioned to
provide a new lobule with skin cover on both surfaces. Posterior covering of the earlobe was supplied by the lower folded prolongation of
the flap. The secondary defect of the flap donor site was primarily sutured after generous undermining. A simple running suture using 6-0
ethilon was used to suture the flap into the primary defect (Figure 4). No postoperative complications were noted. The margins of the
specimen were disease-free. Figure 5 shows the clinical appearance of the surgical site 1 year after surgery. Figure 3Preauricular
transposition flap raised Preauricular transposition flap raised Figure 4Flap sutured in place Flap sutured in place Figure 5Clinical
appearance of the surgical site 2 months after surgery Clinical appearance of the surgical site 2 months after surgery Earlobe deformity may
be congenital or, more often, acquired due to trauma, burns or surgery. Ear lobules are an important reference point for facial symmetry and
they also serve decorative purposes like wearing earrings. Losing them represents an obvious aesthetic abnormality. Earlobe reconstruction
following tumor excision is a challenge for most dermatological surgeons. Several methods developed to reconstruct this deformity have borne
various advantages and disadvantages. 1-8 The superiorly based preauricular transposition flap is technically simple and safe. It requires
only one operation (single-staged surgery) and the donor site is closed directly. Financial Support: None. Work performed at the Servi√ßo de
Dermatologia, Hospital Gardia de Orta - Almada, Portugal.
