Conflict of Interest: None. CLOVES syndrome is a rare, newly described, and relatively unknown syndrome, related to somatic mutations of the
PIK3CA gene. Clinical findings include adipose tissue overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevi, scoliosis, and spinal deformities.
This report deals with a characteristic phenotype case, highlighting peculiar cutaneous and radiological changes. A two-year-old child was
referred to evaluate the increase in the soft parts in the lower back, left arm, and posterior portion of the lower limbs, which had been
present since birth. The patient also presented flatfeet, epidermal nevi on the right arm, nodular plate with a cystic formation on the left
arm, spacing between the first and second toes, capillary malformation in the trunk, as well as epispadia and scoliosis of the thoracic-
lumbar spine (Figures 1 and 2). Imaging exams (computed tomography of the abdomen and magnetic resonance of the abdomen and right upper
limb) revealed confluent and heterogeneous lobes located in the subcutaneous adipose tissue of the abdomen, with a cystic aspect, suggestive
of lymphangioma, an asymmetrical increase in the fat deposit on the retroperitoneal posterior abdominal wall, as well as paravertebral
muscles, presence of scoliosis in the thoracic-lumbar spine (Figure 3), and complex vascular malformation in the left arm (Figure 4). Figure
1Increase in the soft parts of the lumbar region and the pos terior portion of the lower limbs (A), flatfeet, spacing between the first and
second toes, and scoliosis of the thoracic-lumbar spine (B) Increase in the soft parts of the lumbar region and the pos terior portion of
the lower limbs (A), flatfeet, spacing between the first and second toes, and scoliosis of the thoracic-lumbar spine (B) Figure 2(A) plaque
with cystic growth on the left arm; (B) capillary malformation in the trunk; (C) epidermal nevi on the right arm and right cervical region
(D) (A) plaque with cystic growth on the left arm; (B) capillary malformation in the trunk; (C) epidermal nevi on the right arm and right
cervical region (D) Figure 3(A) magnetic resonance presenting confluent and heterogeneous lobulated lesions located in the sub cutaneous
adipose tissue of the right lower abdo men, presenting a cystic aspect; (B) asymmetric increase of the fat deposit on the retroperitoneal
posterior abdominal wall, as well as paravertebral muscles and the presence of scoliosis in the thoracic-lumbar spine; (C) dif fuse
thickness of the sub cutaneous adipose tissue, predominantly found on the thoracic-lumbar spine (A) magnetic resonance presenting confluent
and heterogeneous lobulated lesions located in the sub cutaneous adipose tissue of the right lower abdo men, presenting a cystic aspect; (B)
asymmetric increase of the fat deposit on the retroperitoneal posterior abdominal wall, as well as paravertebral muscles and the presence of
scoliosis in the thoracic-lumbar spine; (C) dif fuse thickness of the sub cutaneous adipose tissue, predominantly found on the thoracic-
lumbar spine Figure 4Magnetic resonance presenting a lobe-shaped expansive lesion in the subcutaneous tissue of the distal third of the arm,
extending down to the forearm, on its ulnar surface, compatible with low-flow complex vascular malformation - coronal slice (a) and axial
slice (b) Magnetic resonance presenting a lobe-shaped expansive lesion in the subcutaneous tissue of the distal third of the arm, extending
down to the forearm, on its ulnar surface, compatible with low-flow complex vascular malformation - coronal slice (a) and axial slice (b)
The overgrowth syndromes with complex vascular anomalies are rare entities characterized by the association of hypertrophy of one or more
regions of the body and multifocal vascular anomalies1. The diagnosis and treatment are quite challenging. In the past, patients with
skeletal growth were classified as having Proteus syndrome, whereas those with significant vascular abnormalities were diagnosed with
Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome2. Recently, the CLOVES syndrome was described and differentiated from other excessive growth disturbances
associated with vascular anomalies. The acronym CLOVES (Congenital Lipomatous Overgrowth, Vascular malformation, Epidermal nevi, Scoliosis
and spinal deformities) represents the main characteristics of the syndrome: adipose tissue overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal
nevi, scoliosis, and spinal deformities.1,2 With only about 20 cases published to date, the syndrome is related to the somatic mutations of
the PIK3CA gene in the 3q26.32 chromosome, with consequent activation of the Akt-mTOR pathway. The mTOR protein performs a key regulator
role in cell proliferation, growth, and survival.3 The activation of this pathway is related to other conditions of overgrowth, such as the
Proteus and megalencephaly syndromes.4 The diagnosis is usually clinical, owing to distinct characteristics, with the histopathological exam
rarely deemed necessary.5 The deformities are congenital and represented by lipomatous masses, which result in asymmetric hypertrophy of the
trunk, in addition to vascular malformation and epidermal nevi.5 The involvement of the central nervous system, through non-contiguous
abnormalities of the gray and white matter, partial agenesia of the corpus callosum, and ventriculomegaly, has also been reported in prior
literature.6 Muscular-skeletal changes and acral anomalies include legs with an uneven length, chondromalacia patellae, scoliosis, large
hands and legs, and an increase in the distance between the first and second toes. There are no associated cardiovascular, gastrointestinal,
or hematopoietic anomalies.5 The treatment is similar to other forms of overgrowth, with surgical reconstruction often recommended.7
Financial Support: None. Work performed at the Hospital das Cl√≠nicas da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (HC-UFMG) - Belo Horizonte
(MG), Brazil.
