Rare disorders often represent a challenge for clinicians and require close collaboration of an interdisciplinary team. We present the
complex case of a 22-year-old male with Danon disease and late-onset of posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder after heart
transplantation. The critical aspects of his condition were: pre-existing rhabdomyolysis; infiltration of muscle and gut with lymphoma;
advanced clinical stage with bulky disease; nonresponsiveness to the reduction of immunosuppression and rituximab monotherapy; expected
cardiotoxicity of anthracyclines. Therefore, the patient was treated with the EPOCH-R protocol, which includes continuous administration of
doxorubicin over 4 days, instead of R-CHOP, in which the anthracycline is given in a short single infusion. Complete remission was achieved
after the third cycle; rhabdomyolysis did not increase and heart function was not affected. The patient received a total of 6 cycles and is
still in metabolic complete remission. We conclude that patients with Danon disease can be treated with anthracycline-containing
chemotherapy and that continuous infusion of EPOCH-R does not exacerbate pre-existing rhabdomyolysis. Danon disease is a rare X-linked
lysosomal storage disease (LSD) characterized by an early onset of muscle weakness and severe cardiomyopathy sometimes, necessitating heart
transplantation. The underlying defect is poorly understood, but is associated with a mutation in the lysosome-associated membrane protein-2
(LAMP2) gene and modulations in autophagy. Elevated serum creatinine kinase (CK) levels are sometimes observed. Posttransplant
lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLDs) occur in up to 10% of organ transplant recipients with heterogeneous clinical manifestations ranging
from indolent polyclonal proliferations of lymphocytes to aggressive lymphomas. Current treatment strategies recommend a sequential therapy
including reduction of immunosuppression, use of rituximab (R), combination chemotherapy, and radiation. If chemotherapy is needed,
anthracycline-based chemotherapy, that is the CHOP protocol (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) in combination with R,
is generally considered to be the most effective treatment especially in B-cell-derived PTLDs. As far as our knowledge is concerned, the co-
occurrence of Danon disease and PTLD has not been reported yet. We report a unique case of Danon disease with PTLDs after heart
transplantation. In March 2015, a 22-year-old Caucasian male student who had undergone heart transplantation at the age of 12 due to
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with LAMP2-positive Danon disease was diagnosed with a non-Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-associated PTLD.
Histopathological examination showed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of centroblastic and germinal center type highly positive for
BCL6, weakly for v-myc avian myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog, but negative for BCL2 protein (double hit score 0), with a
proliferation index of 95%. Clinical manifestations included extranodal lymphoma of the jejunum, mesentery, rectus abdominis muscle, and
multiple lymph nodes (clinical stage III with bulky disease) (Fig. 1A). Physical examination revealed a large (5 × 6 cm) tumor in the
abdominal wall. Lactate dehydrogenase levels (LDHs) had been elevated since childhood (range 450–1885 U/L) and was assumed to be associated
with Danon disease. The patient's family history did not include Danon disease, and was negative for malignant diseases. The patient's
medical history revealed chronic rhabdomyolysis, with CK levels around 1100 U/L, a retinopathy/myopia, and a human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
reactivation in 2007. Imaging in a patient with Danon disease and posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder 10 years after heart
transplantation. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging showing lymphoma burden (A) before treatment (B) after the third cycle of
EPOCH-R. Initially, immunosuppression was modified (treatment with mycophenolic acid 900 mg/d was discontinued, whereas treatment with
tacrolimus 2.5 mg/d was unchanged), and the patient received a total of 4 doses of rituximab weekly without sufficient response.
Immunochemotherapy was therefore planned. Since we were concerned for an exacerbation of the rhabdomyolysis with short-term infusion of
R-CHOP, we initiated treatment with reduced-dose EPOCH-R (1 m2 instead of 1.68 m2; etoposide, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine,
and prednisone with rituximab). This was intended to reduce peak concentrations of doxorubucin, which can be associated with muscle damage
and carry a higher risk for cardiotoxicity; and to enable immediate interruption of doxorubicin administration in case of severe myolysis.
EPOCH-R was well-tolerated and CK levels even decreased during treatment (Fig. 2). Course of serum creatine kinase (CK) and lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) levels before, during, and after antilymphoma treatment. After the second cycle, the patient developed febrile
neutropenia and reported abdominal pain, and was affected by enduring vomiting. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed distended intestinal
loops, and also partial remission of the lymphoma. Our interdisciplinary team decided to use a conservative approach and to continue
chemotherapy with EPOCH-R. After the third cycle, a positron emission tomography–magnetic resonance imaging revealed complete metabolic
remission (CR) of the lymphoma, but intestinal loops were still distended (Fig. 1B). A few days later, the patient developed clinical signs
of a mechanical ileus due to adhesions that required surgical treatment. Histologically, no signs of malignancy were detected. After
surgery, the patient received additional 3 cycles of EPOCH-R, which he tolerated well without any side-effects, and has been in CR since.
Both the systolic function monitored by echocardiography and pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (pro-BNP) remained unaffected before, during,
and after treatment. The LSDs are a heterogeneous group of rare inherited disorders with trafficking dysfunctions within the
lysosome–endosome system leading to substrate accumulation in different organs. Long-term complications include prolonged local
inflammation, activation of cell-death signaling, and dysregulation of autophagy. These pathologic conditions often induce irreversible
organ dysfunction that require organ transplantation. Recently, LSDs were reported to be at increased risk for malignancies, including
multiple myeloma and aberrant myelopoiesis, but further studies are urgent. Due to the rare co-occurrence of LSDs and malignancies, and
since drug metabolism and side-effects may differ, there is an urgent need to report cases like ours to improve management of these
patients. Therapeutic approaches in LSDs are currently being investigated in preclinical and clinical trials. Evidence for administration of
immunomodulating agents such as R has been reported in cases in which patients developed IgG antibodies after treatment with enzyme
replacement therapy (ERT). Initially, the reduction of immunosuppression and treatment with R alone—according to the international
recommendations and to our local standard operating procedures for patients with PTLD—seemed to be a safe option for our patient. Although
CK and LDH levels began to decrease upon treatment initiation, the lymphoma did not sufficiently respond to therapy. Complicating
circumstances were: the underlying Danon disease that had already affected the heart requiring heart transplantation; cardiac toxicity as a
well-known side-effect of anthracyclines, particularly when administered with high peak concentrations; lack of literature and local
experience with respect to administration of chemotherapy in patients with pre-existent chronic rhabdomyolysis and considerable muscle
infiltration. In nontransplant-associated DLBCL, continuous administration of EPOCH-R showed high efficiency in high-risk cases such as
double-hit (DH) lymphomas, and treatment with EPOCH has been reported in a few PTLD cases. Given that this form of anthracycline infusion
might be less cardiotoxic and might have other advantages, especially the presented, we decided to start therapy with reduced dose (1 m2)
EPOCH-R. Treatment was generally well-tolerated with rapid response and without severe side-effects, and left ventricular systolic function
remained unaffected. We conclude that the EPOCH-R protocol might have an advantage over R-CHOP, especially in more complex cases with higher
risk of therapy-induced complications, and also shows high efficacy in PTLDs. Abbreviations: BNP = B-type natriuretic peptide, CK =
creatinine kinase, CR = complete remission, DH = double-hit, DLBCL = diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, EBV = Epstein–Barr virus, ERT = enzyme
replacement therapy, HCMV = human cytomegalovirus, LAMP2 = lysosome-associated membrane protein-2, LDH = lactate dehydrogenase, LSD =
lysosomal storage disease, MYC = v-myc avian myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog, PET-MRI = positron emission tomography–magnetic
resonance imaging, PTLD = posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder, R = rituximab. Author contributions: EP, US-M, and UJ treated the
patient and wrote the manuscript; EP collected and assembled data; MM provided imaging data. The final approval of the manuscript was done
by all the authors. Disclosures: All authors have been involved in the care of the patient. Patient informed consent was given. The authors
have no conflicts of interests to disclose.
