Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 61 Final Diagnosis: Streptococcus pneumoniae pericarditis Symptoms: —
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Pericardiocentesis Specialty: Critical Care Medicine Rare disease Cardiac tamponade caused by pericardial
effusion has a high mortality rate; thus, it is important to diagnose and treat this condition immediately. Specifically, bacterial
pericarditis, although now very rare, is often fatal because of its fulminant process. We present a case of a 61-year-old man with
metastatic small cell lung cancer undergoing chemotherapy who presented with fatigue, poor appetite, and altered mental status. He was found
to have a large-volume pericardial effusion with tamponade physiology. He underwent emergent pericardiocentesis. The pericardial effusion
was nonmalignant, with cultures growing Streptococcus pneumoniae. It was only after his emergent pericardiocentesis that previous imaging
from one month prior was able to be reviewed, which showed possible right upper lobe abscess. Most pericardial effusions in cancer patients
are related to their malignancy, either due to direct metastasis or secondary physiologic effects. This case is a unique example of a lung
cancer patient presenting with a pneumococcal pericardial effusion, which in itself is a rare phenomenon. This case report demonstrates the
importance of considering early antibiotic therapy in patients presenting with pericardial effusion, especially given the high mortality
rates of infectious pericardial effusions. There are many causes of pericardial effusion: infectious, autoimmune, malignant, metabolic,
drugs/toxins, traumatic, and idiopathic . The most common etiology of large-volume pericardial effusions varies depending on the population
studied . Determining the etiology can be challenging, but is critical for subsequent management, treatment, and prognosis. Specifically,
bacterial pericarditis has a high mortality rate of 40% despite treatment, usually due to cardiac tamponade as a complication . Mechanisms
of infection include direct spread from a pneumonia, empyema, or other mediastinal infection and hematogenous spread . However, bacterial
pericarditis is often difficult to recognize, especially since it is now rare in developed countries: the incidence is reported to be less
than 1% . Streptococcus and Staphylococcus species are the most common bacteria to cause pericarditis . Streptococcus pneumoniae was the
most prevalent microbe prior to the advent of the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and antibiotics . Klacsmann et al. reviewed autopsy reports
of 145 patients with purulent pericarditis from 1889 to 1943, of which 51% were secondary to S. pneumoniae . In contrast, there were only 15
reported cases of pneumococcal pericarditis from 1980 to 1994 . We present a unique case of a patient with small cell lung carcinoma who
presented with an infectious, rather than malignant, pericardial effusion secondary to S. pneumoniae. A 61-year-old African American man
with stage IV small cell carcinoma of the lung, status post whole brain radiation and currently undergoing chemotherapy, was sent to the
emergency department (ED) directly from clinic after he was found to be hypotensive with a blood pressure of 66/29 mm Hg. The patient had
had altered mental status, decreased appetite, vomiting, fatigue, and generalized pain for the past two days. On the day of admission, he
was on cycle 2, day 3 of chemotherapy (IV cisplatin and etoposide on day 1 followed by two days of oral etoposide). In the ED he had a
temperature of 36.1°C, heart rate of 140–160 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/minute, and a blood pressure of 67/47 mm Hg. He
received a 2-L normal saline bolus, which briefly raised his systolic blood pressure to 85, but it then returned to the 60s. On exam, he was
in acute distress, tachypneic, and alert but disoriented. Jugular venous distension was present up to the jaw, without pulsus paradoxus or
Kussmaul sign. He had muffled heart sounds and was tachycardic with an irregularly irregular rhythm. He did not have peripheral edema. His
electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response (AFib-RVR), and decreased QRS voltages with no ST segment or
T wave changes (Figure 1). Electrical alterans was absent. Portable chest radiograph showed a cardiac silhouette within normal limits for a
portable exam and no widened mediastinum (Figure 2). He had an elevated white blood cell count of 12,000/µL with 93% neutrophil predominance
and a venous lactate of 11.2 mmol/L. Serial troponins were negative. Bedside echocardiogram demonstrated a large pericardial effusion, the
heart swinging in the pericardial fluid, and diastolic collapse of the right ventricle (Figure 3). The inferior vena cava was dilated and
noncollapsing with the respiratory cycle despite the severe volume depletion (Figure 3). The patient underwent emergent percutaneous
pericardiocentesis under fluoroscopic guidance within 15 minutes in the interventional cardiology laboratory; 450 mL of milky, purulent
fluid was drained. Within less than 2 minutes and after draining less than 150 mL of the fluid, the blood pressure increased to 143/73 mm Hg
despite persistence of the Afib-RVR at a rate of 150s/min. This improvement confirmed that the hemodynamic compromise was tamponade related
rather than RVR related. Because the patient was in septic shock and immunocompromised, broad spectrum IV antibiotics were begun:
vancomycin, piperacillin-tazobactam, and micafungin. Later that evening, the pericardial fluid Gram stain showed 4+ gram-positive cocci
(Figure 4). The fluid had a white cell count of 228,850/µL, 99% neutrophil predominance, glucose <20, total protein 4.6, and lactate
dehydrogenase >20,000. The next morning, pericardial fluid as well as peripheral blood cultures grew pan-sensitive S. pneumoniae. His
antibiotic coverage was narrowed to ceftriaxone 2 g IV every 12 hours. Pericardial fluid cytology did not reveal malignant cells, only
markers of acute infection. This case presents a rare combination of a patient with primary lung cancer who presents with a nonmalignant,
infectious pericardial effusion caused by S. pneumoniae. In fact, malignant effusion was initially highest on our differential diagnoses.
Malignancy is often the most common cause of pericardial effusion and subsequent tamponade in patients presenting to a tertiary-care
academic center . Klatt and Heitz found that lung cancer was the most common primary site of cardiac metastases and that pericardial
effusions were present with 33% of epicardial metastases . The prognosis of malignant pericardial effusions is poor and is worsened if the
fluid cytology is abnormal . Thus, it is a critical etiology to rule in or out. In fact, sometimes cytology is the only clue for diagnosis;
for example, there was a recent case report of a patient without any solid masses or lymphadenopathy who was diagnosed with small cell
carcinoma solely from pleural effusion cytology . However, many studies have shown that pathologic evaluation of pericardial fluid,
specifically, is not always diagnostic. Also, having a primary malignancy can in fact confound the picture. El Haddad et al. studied 1645
cancer patients at the MD Anderson Cancer Center with pericardial effusions, 212 of whom underwent percutaneous pericardiocentesis . Of
those, 41% were shown to have direct cancer involvement of the pericardium, while 57% had effusions of undetermined etiology. Similarly,
Porte et al. studied 112 patients with a history of cancer who underwent pericardiocentesis, 38% of whom had malignant effusions, while 61%
had nonmalignant effusions of undetermined etiology . These nonmalignant effusions are hypothesized to be caused by indirect effects of
malignancy and subsequent chemotherapy and radiation, such as lymphatic obstruction, pericardial fibrosis, fluid accumulation, and
inflammation . Thus, the majority of pericardial effusions in patients with a malignancy still appear to be secondary to the malignancy. In
our patient’s case, however, the presence of a primary lung malignancy proved to be a complete red herring, because the pericardial effusion
did reveal any malignant cells and instead grew Pneumococcus. Infectious effusion was second on our differential diagnosis, especially
because the patient was immunocompromised. Despite being afebrile, his presentation was concerning for septic shock, given his elevated
white blood cell count with left shift and lactate of 11.2. Reviewing a computed tomographic angiogram of the chest from one month prior to
admission demonstrated progression of the right perihilar and mediastinal mass, and adenopathy causing superior vena cava occlusion and
obstructive collapse of the right upper lobe. Within this collapsed lobe was an area of low density concerning for abscess, which may have
seeded the pericardium (Figure 5). As discussed, bacterial pericardial effusions, specifically due to S. pneumoniae, are very rare in
developed countries, with only isolated case reports published. However, this case is especially unique because there are very few reports
of primary lung cancer patients developing a purely bacterial pericardial effusion. For example, of the 212 cancer patients with pleural
effusions from the El Haddad et al. study, only 4 patients (2%) had infectious effusions: 2 bacterial, 1 viral, and 1 fungal . One other
publication found after a thorough literature search was a case report of a patient with squamous cell lung cancer and pericardial effusion
with both malignant squamous cells and S. pneumoniae in the pericardial fluid . In a time when antibiotic stewardship is so important (with
increasing microbial resistance due to liberal and often knee-jerk administration of antibiotics), this case report is an example of a
specific clinical situation where early empiric antibiotic therapy changed the patient’s outcome for the better, even when the objective
data show that infectious pericarditis is extremely rare in patients with malignancies. The etiology of pericardial effusions in patients
with malignancy can be confounded by many factors. However, the majority of these effusions are still related to direct and indirect effects
of the malignancy and treatment therapies. However, although infectious pericarditis is especially rare in patients with malignancies,
physicians should always consider early empiric therapies including antibiotics in similar patient populations while awaiting pericardial
fluid analysis. Electrocardiogram (ECG) on admission (A) with cardiac tamponade showing atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular
response with lower voltages, and ECG after pericardiocentesis (B) showing sinus rhythm with low voltages. Portable chest radiograph on
admission (A) showing cardiac silhouette within normal limits for a portable exam. Portable chest radiograph after pericardiocentesis and 3
liters of IV fluids given during the resuscitation of septic shock (B), showing more obvious pulmonary infiltrates. The initial bedside
echocardiogram showing large-volume pericardial effusion with diastolic collapse of the right ventricle (A) and noncollapsing inferior vena
cava despite volume depletion due to pericardial tamponade and blood shunting resulting from superior vena cava occlusion (B). Streptococcus
pneumoniae (gram-positive diplococci) on the initial pericardial fluid smear. Image courtesy Donald J. Driscoll, Southern Arizona VA
Healthcare System, Department of Anatomic and Clinical Pathology. Prior chest computed tomography scan with contrast showing an area
concerning for abscess in the right upper lobe.
