To the Editor: A 26-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital because of a 4-day history of fever (39.3°C), accompanied by red urine,
urinary frequency, odynuria, urgency, bilateral flank pain, and 2 days of anuria. The patient had no medical history and never received
medical examinations. In the recent 1 month, she felt exhausted due to patient's care. On physical examination, temperature was 39°C. There
was percussion pain in bilateral renal regions. Laboratory tests showed that the white blood cell (WBC) count was 21.13 × 109/L with 87.7%
neutrophils. The serum creatinine (SCr) was increased to 706.5 μmol/L. Serum glucose was 27.5 mmol/L and glycosylated hemoglobin was 8%.
Routine urinalysis showed protein (++), glucose (+++), acetone (+), and red blood cell (RBC) full/high power field (HPF) with the normal
ones were predominant and WBC 10–20/HPF. Urinary protein was 819.9 mg/d. Urine culture was negative (urine examination after antibiotic
treatment). Blood culture grew Escherichia coli. Renal ultrasonography revealed the left kidney of 15.8 cm × 6.1 cm × 6.9 cm and the right
kidney of 12.9 cm × 6.5 cm × 7.1 cm. A computerized tomography (CT) scan showed that both kidneys, especially the left kidney, were enlarged
and hypoperfused, and there were multiple flaky low-density shadows in the left kidney. The first renal biopsy was performed. No positive
findings were found by immunofluorescence staining. Under light microscopy, no positive findings were found in glomeruli. Renal interstitium
was massively expanded by a cellular infiltration, including some foamy eosinophilic macrophages (von Hansemann cells). A few of round
cytoplasmic periodic acid–Schiff-positive basophilic Michaelis–Gutmann (M-G) bodies were observed [Figure 1]. Under electron microscopy, the
interstitium was infiltrated by ample phagocytes containing membranous phagolysosome. (a) Photomicrograph of the first renal biopsy. Kidney
biopsy specimen shows diffuse interstitial inflammation and Michaelis–Gutmann bodies (arrows) (periodic acid–Schiff staining, Original
magnification ×400). (b) Abdominal computerized tomography shows bilaterally enlarged kidney with multiple flaky low-density shadows. (c)
Photomicrograph of the second renal biopsy showing renal interstitium is massively expanded by a large number of inflammatory cell
infiltration (Masson staining, Original magnification ×100). (d) Follow-up advanced computerized tomography after 8 weeks of antibiotic
therapy shows that the kidneys are smaller in size and the left kidney is more hypoperfused than the right kidney. The patient was treated
with insulin and intravenous antibiotics (7-day meropenem followed by levofloxacin). After 7-day antibiotic therapy, the body temperature
returned to normal. SCr decreased to 84.7 μmol/L and fasting sugar to 5.2 mmol/L after 2 weeks treatment. The patient remained on antibiotic
therapy with levofloxacin. The second renal biopsy was done 8 weeks later. Compared to the first pathological results, the number of von
Hansemann cells in the interstitium was decreased but inflammatory cell infiltration in the interstitium and tubular injury did not improve
significantly [Figure 1]. Laboratory tests showed SCr 86.9 μmol/L; urinalysis showed protein (−), glucose (−), RBC 0–2/HPF, and WBC
4–12/HPF. Renal ultrasonography revealed shrinkage of bilateral kidneys (the left kidney 12.9 cm × 4.5 cm × 4.8 cm and the right kidney 11.2
cm × 5.0 cm × 4.5 cm). Advanced CT revealed that the kidneys were still enlarged but shrank than before, with multiple flaky low-density
areas in the parenchyma. In view of these inflammatory changes in renal interstitium, prednisone (30 mg/d) and cyclophosphamide (50 mg/d)
were commenced and reduced gradually for 6 months. Levofloxacin treatment lasted for 6 months simultaneously. Her renal function has
remained normal at routine follow-up for 17 months. Renal parenchymal malakoplakia is a rare cause of acute renal failure. It is usually
associated with an immunocompromised status such as diabetes, alcohol abuse, and immunosuppression. Renal manifestations included flank
pain, hematuria, repeated urinary infection and protein, white cells and red cells in the urine, and with or without renal dysfunction.
Under CT images, the kidney is enlarged and renal parenchyma had inhomogeneous low-density masses. Histopathologically, it is characterized
by von Hansemann cell and M-G bodies. Under electron microscopy, there are different stages of phagolysosomes and bacterial fragments in
foamy macrophages. Currently, malakoplakia is thought to be associated with infection. E. coli is the most common. Therefore, agents
targeting Gram-negative bacteria with high bioavailability in macrophages are most commonly chosen, such as quinolones and sulfamido groups.
Some scholars pointed out that in malakoplakia, macrophage dysfunction and persistent antigens within cells cause progressive delivery of
cytokines, resulting in renal inflammation and further injury. If the early interstitial injury is not controlled, renal injury continues to
deteriorate and even processes to interstitial fibrosis even though bacteria are removed. To date, there are only very few case reports
concerning antibiotics plus corticosteroids for treatment of renal malakoplakia. In the present case, although renal function was recovered
after antibiotics treatment, repeated renal biopsy revealed significant infiltration of inflammatory cells in renal interstitium. Therefore,
corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide were given to inhibit interstitial inflammation and improve the prognosis. The patient's renal function
has remained normal at routine follow-up. Suppression of the inflammation with immunomodulators would, therefore, seem logical and is not
contrary to the present treatments, emphasizing the differences in pathogenesis outlined above. Nil. There are no conflicts of interest.
Edited by: Li-Shao Guo
