In East Asia, monomorphic epitheliotropic intestinal T-cell lymphoma (MEITL), previously known as type II enteropathy-associated T-cell
lymphoma (EATL), occurs more frequently than type I EATL, and coeliac disease is rare. Here we present four cases of MEITL in Japanese
patients, including the endoscopic and pathological findings of their duodenal and colorectal lesions. Tumor specimens obtained from
duodenal, intestinal, and colorectal biopsies in all four patients showed a diffuse intramucosal infiltration of small to/or medium-sized
lymphoma cells and numerous atypical intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs). These cells were immunohistologically positive for CD103, CD3, CD7,
CD8, CD56, and T-cell intracellular antigen-1. Upper and lower gastrointestinal and antegrade double-balloon endoscopy revealed foci of
edematous mucosa, with or without villous atrophy, in the non-neoplastic mucosa. Histological studies demonstrated duodenal and intestinal
enteropathy-like lesions as well as microscopic (lymphocytic) proctocolitis with increased CD3- and CD8-positive and CD56-negative T-IELs in
all four patients. The clinicopathological findings of the non-neoplastic lesions were similar to those characteristic of coeliac disease,
suggesting that variants of coeliac disease may be present in the prodromal lesions of MEITL. Our study supports the need for random
gastrointestinal biopsies to determine tumor spread, the features of MEITL in the particular patients, and the presence of prodromal non-
neoplastic lesions. Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma (EATL) is uncommon worldwide but occurs more frequently in areas with a high
prevalence of coeliac disease, particularly in Northern Europe and America . In the recent World Health Organization (WHO) classification,
EATL is classified into two types. In Northern Europe and America, ~80 % of type I EATL cases consist of CD103- and CD30-positive, CD56- and
CD8-negative large-cell lymphomas. These cases are closely associated with the occurrence of coeliac disease . In patients with type II
EATL, which is now referred to as monomorphic epitheliotropic intestinal T-cell lymphoma (MEITL), complications of coeliac disease are rare.
Most MEITLs are CD103-, CD56-, and CD8-positive, CD30-negative monomorphic lymphomas with small- to medium-sized cells . In East Asia, type
I EATL is rare, consistent with the rarity of coeliac disease. The latter is characterized by an allergic reaction to gluten and an
association with HLA-DQ 2(B1*02) and DQ8 serotypes [2, 4, 5]. MEITL is predominantly located in the small intestine but the background
presence of enteropathy is controversial [3, 6]. In East Asia, MEITL typically lacks the persistent clinicopathological features of
enteropathy, in contrast to a worldwide study in which a clinical history of coeliac disease was determined in four of 15 (27 %) patients
with MEITL . Compared with the general population, patients with coeliac disease have a 70-fold higher risk of microscopic (lymphocytic or
collagenous) colitis accompanied by either an edematous or a normal-looking mucosa . Here we provide a detailed report of the endoscopic and
pathological findings of four Japanese patients with multiple lesions of gastrointestinal (GI) MEITL complicating the duodenal and
intestinal enteropathy-like lesions and microscopic (lymphocytic) foci of proctocolitis characterized by increased numbers of
intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) . These cases demonstrate that variants of coeliac disease may be present in East Asian patients with
MEITL and thus the necessity of a random whole-GI-tract biopsy in this group of MEITL patients. The four selected cases were histologically
classified according to the WHO system of classification , in which type II EATL is now referred to as MEITL. All four patients were
seronegative for antibodies against human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 and none had Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection, as determined by
in situ hybridization of EBV-encoded RNA (DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark). Tumor stage was classified according to the modified Ann Arbor
staging system . Tissue specimens were fixed with 10 % formalin, embedded in paraffin, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). In non-
neoplastic mucosa, the detection of >30 small IELs per 100 epithelial cells was considered to indicate positive, specific findings.
Scattered small IELs without irregular nuclei were presumed to be reactive. Small to/or medium-sized lymphocytes with irregular nuclei and
densely infiltrating epithelial glands were defined as atypical IELs. Enteropathy-like lesions in the duodenum and small intestine were
recognized based on the increased number of IELs and the presence of villous atrophy . Tumor immunohistology was evaluated by incubating
formalin-fixed tumor samples with a panel of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies, according to the ChemMate Envision (DakoCytomation)
method. Peroxidase reactions were developed using diaminobenzidine as the substrate. Staining for CD20 (clone: L26; Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan),
CD3 (PS1; Leica, Newcastle, UK), T-cell receptor (TCR)-βF1 (8A3; Endogen, Rockford, IL, USA), TCRCγM1 (γ3.20; Endogen), CD4 (4B12, Leica),
CD5 (4C7, Leica), CD7 (LP15, Leica), CD8 (C81/44B; Leica), CD30 (BerH2; DakoCytomation), CD103 (EPR4166 ; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), CD56 (1B6;
Leica), and T-cell intracellular antigen (TIA1, 2GP; Immunotech, Marseille, France) was performed after antigen retrieval. Samples in which
>25 % of the cells were labeled with a particular antibody marker were classified as positive for that marker. The clinical and pathological
features of the four patients diagnosed with MEITL are summarized in Tables 1 and 2.Table 1Clinical features, treatments and prognosis in
four cases of MEITLCase 1Case 2Case 3Case 4Age (years)60405070SexMFFMChief complaintsDiarrheaDiarrheaAbdominal distentionNauseaDuration of
chief complains (mons)17312Total protein (g/dl)44.46.66.4Albumin (g/dl)2.12.93.83LDH (IU/l)165156187150sIL2R (U/ml)96314194150587Anti-
gliadin/-transglutaminase tests−/−nenene Helicobacter pylori IgG antibody−ne−+Gastrointestinal perforation−+ (after treatment)−−Bone marrow
tumour invasion+ (30 %)−+ (30 %)+ (20 %)Clinical stageIVIIVIVTreatment (regimen)CHASE, SCTTHP-COP, surgeryCHOP, SCTSMILEResponsePartial
responseNo responsePartial responsePartial responseSurvival times (months)36, dead12, dead9, dead9, dead CHASE Cyclophosphamide, cytarabine,
etoposide, dexametahsone, SCT Stem cell transplantation, THP-COP Pirarubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisolone, CHOP
Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone, SMILE Dexamethasone, methotrexate, ifosfamide, L-asparaginase, etoposide; ne not
examinedTable 2Endoscopic and histological findings in the GI tract and cell-surface markers in four patients with MEITLCase 1Case 2Case
3Case 4Duodenal tumour lesionsEdematous mucosaEdematous mucosaReddish granular mucosaSubmucosal tumors, pinhole-like stenosisIntestinal
tumour lesionsDiffuse thickening, circumferential ulcersDiffuse thickening, ulcerative tumoursDiffuse thickeningDiffuse thickeningColonic
tumor lesionsEdematous mucosaEdematous mucosaEdematous mucosa with erosions and ulcersEdematous mucosaDuodenal nonneoplastic lesionEdematous
mucosa, villous atrophyEdematous mucosa, villous atrophyEdematous mucosa, villous atrophyEdematous mucosa, villous atrophyIntestinal
nonneoplastic lesionDiffuse edematous mucosa, villous atrophyDiffuse granular mucosa, villous atrophyDiffuse granular mucosa, villous
atrophyDiffuse granular mucosa, villous atrophyColorectal nonneoplastic lesionEdematous mucosaEdematous mucosaEdematous mucosaEdematous
mucosaTumour invasion (S/D/I/C/R)+/+/+/+ (cecum)/−−/+/+/+ (cecum) /−ne/+/+/+/+ne/+/+/+/+Duodenal and intestinal enteropathy++++Lymphocytic
proctocolitis++++Increase of reactive T-IELs (D/I/C/R)+/+/+/++/+/+/−+/+/+/++/+/+/+CD103++++TCR βF1+−+−TCR
CγM1−+−+CD3++++CD4−−−−CD7++++CD8++++CD56++++TIA1++++CD5−−−−CD30−−−− S Stomach, D Duodenum, I Intestine, C Colon, R Rectum, IELs
Intraepithelial lymphocytes, TCR T-cell receptor, TIA T-cell intracellular antigen Clinical features, treatments and prognosis in four cases
of MEITL CHASE Cyclophosphamide, cytarabine, etoposide, dexametahsone, SCT Stem cell transplantation, THP-COP Pirarubicin, cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, prednisolone, CHOP Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone, SMILE Dexamethasone, methotrexate, ifosfamide,
L-asparaginase, etoposide; ne not examined Endoscopic and histological findings in the GI tract and cell-surface markers in four patients
with MEITL S Stomach, D Duodenum, I Intestine, C Colon, R Rectum, IELs Intraepithelial lymphocytes, TCR T-cell receptor, TIA T-cell
intracellular antigen A 60-year-old man who was admitted with persistent diarrhea and a 10 kg weight loss in 17 months. After a tentative
diagnosis of coeliac disease he was followed in another hospital for 8 months. His laboratory data revealed hypoproteinemia and elevated
soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL2R). Anti-gliadin and anti-transglutaminase antibodies, serum-specific markers for coeliac disease, were
negative . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed thickening of the jejunal and ileal walls and mild dilatation. On upper GI endoscopy,
a reddish depressed lesion with erosion was seen in the gastric body; in the second portion of the duodenum, the edematous mucosa was
accompanied by villous atrophy (Fig. 1a). Upper GI endoscopy with narrow-band imaging (NBI) showed an edematous mucosa, while magnifying
endoscopy with NBI revealed a cerebriform or flat pattern with villous atrophy in the second duodenal portion (Fig. 1b, c). Capsule
endoscopy demonstrated a diffuse edematous and granular mucosa with villous atrophy and circumferential ulcers in the jejunum and ileum. On
lower GI endoscopy, an edematous mucosa with small erosions at the ileocecal valve were present (Fig. 1d) whereas the findings along the
whole colorectal mucosa were nearly normal. Biopsy specimens from the gastric, duodenal, jejunal, and cecal mucosae showed diffuse
intramucosal invasion by small to medium-sized atypical lymphocytes with irregular hyperchromatic nuclei, in addition to many atypical IELs
(Fig. 2a, b). Immunohistologically, the atypical lymphocytes were positive for CD103, TCR-βF1, CD3, CD7, CD8, CD56, and TIA1. Other biopsy
specimens from the duodenal second portion showed villous atrophy and chronic inflammatory infiltrates. The T-IELs comprising the
infiltrates were positive for CD103, CD3, CD7, CD8, and TIA1 but negative for CD56 and CD5. Evaluation of the colorectum showed colitis with
an increased number of T-IELs, all of which were of the same phenotype (Fig. 2c). A bone marrow biopsy revealed scattered infiltrates of
CD103-, CD3-, CD8-, CD56-positive and CD5-negative atypical lymphocytes; these accounted for ~30 % of the nucleated cells. The patient was
treated with a chemotherapy regimen of CHASE (cyclophosphamide, cytarabine, etoposide, and dexamethasone) and underwent autologous stem cell
transplantation. Despite a partial response to chemotherapy, he died of sepsis 3 years after disease onset.Fig. 1Case 1 (a–b). a: Indigo
carmine spray enhancement and b: narrow-band imaging (NBI) of the duodenal second portion shows the edematous mucosa with villous atrophy.
c: Magnifying endoscopic view with NBI of the duodenal second portion shows cerebriform or flat patterns with villous atrophy. d: Lower
gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopic view of the ileocecal valves shows the edematous mucosa with small erosions; normal-looking mucosa is seen
in the ascending colonFig. 2Patient 1 (a–c). a: A diffuse infiltrate of small to medium-sized atypical lymphocytes and many atypical IELs
are seen in the duodenal (a) and cecal (b) mucosa. c: Small intraepithelial lymphocytes are scattered in the non-neoplastic ascending
colonic mucosa, indicating lymphocytic colitis. Patient 2 (d, e). d: Duodenal enteropathy with atrophic villi and increased IELs. e: Many
small CD8-positive IELs are seen in the duodenum (a, b, c, d: H&E stain; e: immunohistochemistry, hematoxylin stain) Case 1 (a–b). a: Indigo
carmine spray enhancement and b: narrow-band imaging (NBI) of the duodenal second portion shows the edematous mucosa with villous atrophy.
c: Magnifying endoscopic view with NBI of the duodenal second portion shows cerebriform or flat patterns with villous atrophy. d: Lower
gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopic view of the ileocecal valves shows the edematous mucosa with small erosions; normal-looking mucosa is seen
in the ascending colon Patient 1 (a–c). a: A diffuse infiltrate of small to medium-sized atypical lymphocytes and many atypical IELs are
seen in the duodenal (a) and cecal (b) mucosa. c: Small intraepithelial lymphocytes are scattered in the non-neoplastic ascending colonic
mucosa, indicating lymphocytic colitis. Patient 2 (d, e). d: Duodenal enteropathy with atrophic villi and increased IELs. e: Many small
CD8-positive IELs are seen in the duodenum (a, b, c, d: H&E stain; e: immunohistochemistry, hematoxylin stain) A 40-year-old woman who was
admitted with diarrhea and a weight loss of 6 kg in 3 months. Her laboratory data revealed hypoproteinemia and an elevated sIL2R level. On
upper GI endoscopy, the gastric mucosa was nearly normal in its appearance whereas the mucosa of the duodenal second portion was edematous.
Antegrade double-balloon endoscopy of the duodenal third portion and the jejunum showed a diffuse edematous mucosa, erosion, and ulcerative
tumors in both. On lower GI endoscopy, an edematous mucosa and reddish polypoid lesions were seen in the terminal ileum together with an
edematous colorectal mucosa. Biopsy specimens from the duodenal third portion, intestine, and colon showed a diffuse, intramucosal
infiltrate of medium-sized atypical lymphocytes with coarse chromatin together with many atypical IELs. Other biopsy specimens from the
duodenal second portion (Fig. 2d, e) and intestine revealed chronic inflammatory changes with villous atrophy and an abundance of CD103-,
CD8-positive, CD56-negative T-IELs. Scattered infiltrates of CD3-, CD4-, and CD8-positive, CD103- and CD56-negative lymphocytes were
identified on bone marrow specimens but there was no evidence of bone marrow invasion. She was treated with a chemotherapy regimen of THP-
COP (pirarubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine and prednisolone) but 10 months after the initial diagnosis was readmitted to our hospital
with acute abdominal pain due to intestinal perforation. A partial jejunal resection revealed multiple and circumferential ulcerated tumors
with or without perforation; the mucosa surrounding the tumors was characterized by fold thickening with granular changes (Fig. 3a).
Histologically, a diffuse infiltrate of medium-sized atypical lymphocytes accompanied by atypical IELs was present in the mucosa, in the
peripheral zones of the tumors (Fig. 3b). Enteropathy-like lesions with villous atrophy and an abundance of IELs were evident in the mucosal
layer outside the main tumors. Preoperative biopsy specimens obtained from the ascending colon to the rectum revealed colitis, with
increased CD3- and CD8-positive and CD56-negative T-IELs (Fig. 3c, d). She died of the disease 2 months after surgery.Fig. 3Patient 2 (a–d).
a: Two circumferentially ulcerated tumors are evident on gross examination of the resected jejunum. Thickening of Kerckring’s folds and
granular changes in the mucosal surface are seen in the mucosa surrounding the tumor. b: Histological findings of the jejunum include a
diffuse infiltrate of medium-sized atypical lymphocytes with round nuclei in the crypt epithelium and lamina propria of the peripheral zone
of the jejunal tumor. c: Increased small IELs are present in the ascending colon (c); the CD8 positivity of the IELs (d) is indicative of
lymphocytic colitis. (b, c: H&E stain, d: immunohistochemistry, hematoxylin stain) Patient 2 (a–d). a: Two circumferentially ulcerated
tumors are evident on gross examination of the resected jejunum. Thickening of Kerckring’s folds and granular changes in the mucosal surface
are seen in the mucosa surrounding the tumor. b: Histological findings of the jejunum include a diffuse infiltrate of medium-sized atypical
lymphocytes with round nuclei in the crypt epithelium and lamina propria of the peripheral zone of the jejunal tumor. c: Increased small
IELs are present in the ascending colon (c); the CD8 positivity of the IELs (d) is indicative of lymphocytic colitis. (b, c: H&E stain, d:
immunohistochemistry, hematoxylin stain) A 50-year-old woman who was admitted to our hospital for abdominal distension. Her laboratory data
revealed an elevated sIL2R. On abdominal CT, long segmental thickening of the jejunal and ileal wall with dilatation was evident. Upper GI
endoscopy revealed an edematous and reddish granular mucosa with white villi in the duodenal second portion (Fig. 4a). On lower GI
endoscopy, a diffuse granular mucosa with villous atrophy in the terminal ileum, an edematous mucosa with multiple erosions in the ascending
and sigmoid colon, and reddish longitudinal ulcers in the rectum were seen (Fig. 4b–d). Biopsy specimens from the duodenal second portion,
intestine, and colorectum revealed a diffuse intramucosal infiltrate of medium-sized atypical lymphocytes with many atypical IELs (Fig. 5a,
b). Other biopsy specimens from the duodenum, jejunum, and colorectum indicated chronic inflammatory changes of the propria mucosae and
increased CD3- and CD8-positive, CD56-negative T-IELs. An invasion by CD3-, CD8-, and CD56-positive atypical lymphocytes was seen on the
bone marrow specimens. She was treated with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone and high-dose
methotrexate/cytarabine followed by allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Despite a partial response to chemotherapy, she died 9 months
after disease onset.Fig. 4Patient 3 (a–d). a: Upper GI endoscopic view of the duodenal second portion shows an edematous mucosa with a
nodular or mosaic pattern. b: A lower GI endoscopic view of the ascending colon shows an edematous mucosa with multiple erosions. Lower GI
endoscopic views show an edematous mucosa in the sigmoid colon (c) and reddish longitudinal ulcers in the rectum (d)Fig. 5Patient 3 (a, b).
a: Tumors of the sigmoid colon are characterized by a diffuse infiltrate of atypical medium-sized lymphocytes and increased atypical IELs.
b: Infiltrating atypical lymphocytes are diffusely positive for CD56. Patient 4. c: A prominent increase in the number of small atypical
IELs is seen in the cecal mucosa. d: Many small IELs are present in the descending colon. e: Reactive infiltrating IELs of the colon are
positive for CD3 (a, c, d: H&E stain, b, e: immunohistochemistry, hematoxylin stain) Patient 3 (a–d). a: Upper GI endoscopic view of the
duodenal second portion shows an edematous mucosa with a nodular or mosaic pattern. b: A lower GI endoscopic view of the ascending colon
shows an edematous mucosa with multiple erosions. Lower GI endoscopic views show an edematous mucosa in the sigmoid colon (c) and reddish
longitudinal ulcers in the rectum (d) Patient 3 (a, b). a: Tumors of the sigmoid colon are characterized by a diffuse infiltrate of atypical
medium-sized lymphocytes and increased atypical IELs. b: Infiltrating atypical lymphocytes are diffusely positive for CD56. Patient 4. c: A
prominent increase in the number of small atypical IELs is seen in the cecal mucosa. d: Many small IELs are present in the descending colon.
e: Reactive infiltrating IELs of the colon are positive for CD3 (a, c, d: H&E stain, b, e: immunohistochemistry, hematoxylin stain) A
70-year-old man admitted for nausea. His laboratory data revealed pancytopenia and hypoproteinemia. Helicobacter pylori IgG antibody was
positive in serum. Abdominal CT showed a 30-mm-diameter tumor in the duodenal second portion and thickening of the jejunal wall. On
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography, there was FDG uptake in the duodenal second portion. Upper GI endoscopy revealed
pinhole-like severe stenosis, a submucosal tumor at the anal side of the stenosis, and edematous mucosa in the duodenal second portion.
Lower GI endoscopy showed a granular mucosa of the terminal ileum and edematous or normal-looking mucosa in the colorectal mucosa.
Duodenitis with villous atrophy and abundant IELs was evident on biopsy specimens from the duodenal second portion taken outside the tumor.
The tumor itself consisted of small to medium-sized atypical lymphocytes both among the epithelial cells and in the mucosal layer. The cecal
mucosa was characterized by a severe infiltrate of atypical IELs (Fig. 5c). Other biopsy specimens from the duodenum, descending colon, and
rectum showed chronic inflammatory changes with increased CD3- and CD8-positive, CD56-negative T-IELs (Fig. 5d, e). Infiltrating atypical
lymphocytes of the bone marrow were positive for CD3, CD8, CD103, and TCRCγM1, but negative for CD56. He was treated with a chemotherapy
regimen of SMILE (dexamethasone, methotrexate, ifosfamide, L-asparaginase and etoposide). After chemotherapy, abdominal CT revealed a
reduction of the tumor. Despite a partial response to chemotherapy, he died of sepsis 9 months after disease onset. There are several
reports in the literature describing gastroduodenal and colorectal tumors of MEITL and type I EATL, both in European and in East Asian
patients [3, 6, 13, 14]. In the latter group, gastric, duodenal, and colorectal MEITL tumors were reported in three (12 %), eight (31 %),
and six (23 %) of the 26 cases of MEITL, respectively . In their study of European patients, Schmitt-Graff et al. reported tumorous lesions
in six of 20 cases of MEITL (30 %) . In our study, patient 1 had depressed lesions and an edematous mucosa, with tumor cells in the stomach,
duodenum, and colorectum. Patients 2 and 4 had ulcerative or submucosal tumors in the duodenum and an edematous mucosa with tumor cells in
the colorectum. Patient 3 had diffusely granular mucosal lesions, with tumor cells in the duodenum and multiple ulcerated colorectal tumors.
Thus, our study demonstrates that MEITL can expand discontinuously into the mucosa along the entire course of the GI tract. The endoscopic
findings in 12 of the 15 reported cases of MEITL included circumferential ulcerated tumors and an edematous and granular mucosa, with a
nodular or mosaic pattern, in the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum (Table 3) . In addition, in all four patients, the non-neoplastic lesions
consisted of an edematous or granular mucosa, with or without villous atrophy, in the duodenum and intestine. In patient 1, a cerebriform or
flat mucosal pattern with villous atrophy was seen in the duodenum on magnifying endoscopy with NBI. These findings are typical of coeliac
disease . Endoscopically, our study shows that an edematous and granular mucosa, with or without villous atrophy, in the duodenum and
intestine is characteristic of the non-neoplastic and prodromal lesions of MEITL.Table 3Endoscopic findings of duodenum, intestine and
colorectum in reported cases of MEITLCase no.Age/genderLocations and endoscopic findingsReferences177/MDuodenum: Edematous mucosaJejunum:
Mass with circumferential ulcers256/MSigmoid colon: Edematous mucosa, multiple discrete ulcersRectum: Edematous mucosa, multiple discrete
ulcers363/FIleum: Edematous mucosaAppendix: Submucosal tumor-like mass452/FJejunum: Edematous mucosaIleum: Shallow circumferential
ulcers565/MJejunum: Widespread white granular villi670/MJejunum: Edematous mucosa, fusion on villi, multiple small shallow
ulcers760/MDuodenum: Fine granular patterns with ulcersJejunum: Fine granular patterns with ulcersIleum: Edematous mucosa, circumferential
ulcers816/MIleocecum: Multifocal irregular ulcers962/MDuodenum: Huge ulcer1054/MJejunum; Multiple discrete ulcers1171/MAscending colon: Huge
ulcerated tumorLeft side colon: Ordinary-looking mucosa1267/MCecum: Hyperemic, thickened mucosa with central ulcerDescending colon: Fresh-
like flat thickened lesion1350/MIleum: Circumferential shallow ulcersAscending colon: An ulcerative lesion with hyperemic edematous
mucosa1448/MJejunum: Diffuse mucosal thickening and nodularity with multiple shallow ulcers1555/FJejunum: Encircling ulcer, edematous mucosa
with innumerable fine granular elevations and shallow ulcers M Male, F Female Endoscopic findings of duodenum, intestine and colorectum in
reported cases of MEITL M Male, F Female Microscopic colitis consists of lymphocytic and collagenous colitis with >20 IELs per 100 surface
epithelial cells and no or little architectural distortion of the crypts . While of uncertain etiology, both lymphocytic and collagenous
microscopic colitis are occasionally seen in patients with coeliac disease, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and rheumatoid arthritis . In
three reported cases of colonic MEITL, ulcerated tumors and hyperemic as well as normal-looking mucosa outside the tumors were detected
(cases 2, 11, and 12 in Table 3) [15, 23, 24]. However, only the patient described by Kim et al. had colonic MEITL characterized by
presumably normal mucosa with tumor cell invasion . All four of our MEITL patients had an edematous and presumably normal colorectal mucosa,
with an increased number of IELs, and without tumor cells outside the tumors. If lymphocytic proctocolitis is detected it must be
distinguished from prodromal lesions of MEITL, even in East Asian patients. This study supports the importance of performing a random biopsy
of the whole GI tract to detect the spread of MEITL and to identify the underlying non-neoplastic disorders. Duodenitis, enteritis, and
lymphocytic proctocolitis with increased T-IELs were features of all four cases described herein. In addition, the T-IELs were positive for
CD103, CD3, CD7, and CD8 and negative for CD56 and CD5. These findings are similar to those of coeliac disease [9, 27]. In East Asia, rather
than type II EATL, these findings were referred to as MEITL, because of the absence of background histological findings of enteropathy .
However, persistent diarrhea and weight loss have been reported in Asian patients with MEITL, and histologically confirmed enteropathy-like
lesions were detected in eight of 69 cases of intestinal T/NK-cell lymphoma (12 %), including seven cases of MEITL . Kikuma et al. also
reported the presence of some degree of enteropathy-like lesions in 11 of 22 MEITL patients (50 %). Coeliac disease characterized by anti-
gliadin and anti-transglutaminase antibodies is rare in East Asia, whereas based on array comparative genomic hybridization, six of eight
(75 %) Asian patients with MEITL had a gain of chromosome 9q34, as is frequently found in refractory coeliac disease and type I EATL [2,
29]. Thus, variants of coeliac disease may play a role in inducing MEITL. However, refractory coeliac disease, suggesting of prodromal
lesion of type I EATL, frequently has CD8-negative and occasionally CD30-positive T-IELs in duodenum and intestine . Further, Narismägi et
al. demonstrated that mutations of STAT5, JAK3, and G-protein-coupled receptor are common features of MEITL. Thus, type I EATL and MEITL may
include a variety of oncogenes in lymphomagenesis. It is necessary to find etiological factors in patients with variant of coeliac disease
and MEITL. Duodenal and intestinal enteropathy-like lesions and microscopic (lymphocytic) proctocolitis with increased T-IELs resemble the
features of coeliac disease but may be prodromal lesions of MEITL. Moreover, variants of coeliac disease may be present in MEITL. Random
biopsies are necessary to determine the occurrence of tumor spread as well as the characteristics of MEITL and prodromal non-neoplastic
lesions. CT: computed tomography; EATL: enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma; FDG: fluorodeoxyglucose; GI: gastrointestinal; IELs:
intraepithelial lymphocytes; JAK: Janus kinase; MEITL: monomorphic epitheliotropic intestinal T-cell lymphoma; NBI: narrow-band imaging;
STAT: signal transducers and activator of transcription; TCR: T-cell receptor; TIA1: T-cell intracellular antigen 1; WHO: World Health
Organization We are grateful to Tomoko Fukushige, Masako Ishiguro, Tomomi Okabe, and Kaori Saga for their excellent technical assistance.
This study was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (no. 25460444) from the Ministry of Education, Science and
Culture of Japan. The datasets during and analysed during the current study available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
HI analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript: YK, KA, NH, and SS collected the clinical data; SN, TK, and MT analyzed the pathological
findings. YT and MK planned and administered the treatments. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors have no
significant financial interest in any commercial activities pertaining to this article. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patients for publication of this Case Report and the accompanying images. A copy of the written consent form provided to the patients is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Fukuoka University
Hospital. Institutional ethical approval was obtained in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
