To report a patient with angioid streaks (ASs) and coincident multiple evanescent white dot syndrome (MEWDS) who developed choroidal
neovascularization (CNV). A 20-year-old woman presented with reduced vision (20/100) in her left eye (LE). Based on a complete
ophthalmologic examination the patient was diagnosed with ASs and coincident MEWDS. Two weeks later best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA)
improved up to 20/25 and the MEWDS findings almost disappeared. Two months later BCVA dropped again (20/100) due to the development of CNV
which was treated by a single intravitreal injection of ranibizumab (0.5 mg/0.05 mL). One month after this BCVA improved up to 20/40, and
there was regression of the CNV. There was no need for retreatment at the last follow-up visit, 1 year after the ranibizumab injection, when
the patient showed further recovery of BCVA up to 20/25. In this case of ASs, MEWDS completely resolved after 2 weeks, but 2 months later
CNV developed. A single intravitreal injection of ranibizumab had a long-lasting effect. Larger series are necessary to clarify the
pathogenesis of CNV in such cases and the role of intravitreal ranibizumab. Angioid streaks (ASs) are irregular linear breaks in the Bruch’s
membrane that typically taper from the optic disk, usually associated with various systemic diseases such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Paget
disease, and pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) . The main vision-threatening complication of AS is choroidal neovascularization (CNV) which
develops in 72–86 % of eyes [2, 3]. Multiple evanescent white dot syndrome (MEWDS) is a benign inflammatory disorder of unknown etiology
that usually affects young women . >It involves unilateral small, transient white dots at the level of the outer retina, the retinal pigment
epithelium, and the inner choroid, which have a characteristic appearance on fluorescein angiography (FA) and indocyanine green angiography
(ICGA). Patients present various symptoms such as photopsias, blurred vision, sudden decrease in visual acuity and visual field defects,
either temporally or paracentrally . The prognosis is generally very good, even though the rare occurrence of CNV may lead to permanent
visual loss . Here we report a patient with ASs, diagnosed with coincident MEWDS. Two months after the diagnosis of MEWDS the patient
developed CNV, which was effectively treated by intravitreal ranibizumab (Lucentis®, Novartis, Basel, Switzerland). A 20-year-old woman with
diagnosis of ASs was referred to our department for reduced vision in her left eye (LE) of 2 weeks onset; she was negative for
pseudoxanthoma elasticum or any other systemic disease. The patient signed a comprehensive consent form according to Good Clinical Practice
guidelines, before proceeding with all examinations and treatments. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye (RE)
and 20/100 in the LE, with no signs of inflammation in the anterior chamber and vitreous of either eye. Fundus biomicroscopy revealed ASs in
both eyes (BE). RE had no evidence of inflammation at the fundus observation (Fig. 1). Interestingly, only the LE had multiple discrete
grey-white lesions (dots) scattered over the fundus, from the paramacular area up to the mid-periphery, and the macula had a granular
appearance (Fig. 2a, b). Fluorescein angiography (FA) (HRA, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) indicated mild optic disk leakage
with some hyperfluorescent changes scattered throughout the fundus (paramacular area and mid-periphery). No CNV was detected (Fig. 2c).
Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) (HRA, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) disclosed late hypofluorescent lesions scattered at
the posterior pole and in the mid-periphery (Fig. 2d); we interpreted these as signs of zonal outer retinal inflammation. Spectral-domain
optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) macular scans showed disruption in the photoreceptor layer (Fig. 2e). Automated static threshold
perimetry indicated visual field defects mainly located paracentrally and temporally (Fig. 2f).Fig. 1Infrared (IF) (a), Autofluorescence
(AF) (b) and fluorescein angiography (FA) (c) images of the right eye (RE) show the angioid streaks (ASs) with no evidence of inflammation,
and choroidal neovascularization (CNV)Fig. 2Fundus color (a) and red-free (b) photographs of the left eye (LE) show multiple discrete grey-
white lesions (dots) scattered throughout the fundus, with a granular appearance in the macula (a and b). Fluorescein angiography (FA) late
frame indicates mild optic disk leakage with some hyperfluorescent changes scattered over the fundus (c). Indocyanine green angiography
(ICGA) discloses late hypofluorescent lesions scattered at the posterior pole and in the mid-periphery (d). Spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography (SD-OCT) macular scans show disruption in the photoreceptor layer (e). Automated static threshold perimetry reveals
visual field defects mainly located paracentrally and temporally (f) Infrared (IF) (a), Autofluorescence (AF) (b) and fluorescein
angiography (FA) (c) images of the right eye (RE) show the angioid streaks (ASs) with no evidence of inflammation, and choroidal
neovascularization (CNV) Fundus color (a) and red-free (b) photographs of the left eye (LE) show multiple discrete grey-white lesions (dots)
scattered throughout the fundus, with a granular appearance in the macula (a and b). Fluorescein angiography (FA) late frame indicates mild
optic disk leakage with some hyperfluorescent changes scattered over the fundus (c). Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) discloses late
hypofluorescent lesions scattered at the posterior pole and in the mid-periphery (d). Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT)
macular scans show disruption in the photoreceptor layer (e). Automated static threshold perimetry reveals visual field defects mainly
located paracentrally and temporally (f) On the basis of all these findings a diagnosis of ASs and coincident MEWDS was made. The patient
was prescribed oral prednisone (1 mg/kg) for 7 days then half the dosage for another 7 days. Two weeks later, LE BCVA improved up to 20/25,
with resolution of the MEWDS findings, except for the granular appearance at the macula; RE BCVA was 20/20 with no signs of inflammation at
the fundus evaluation. Two months later, the patient returned because of sudden vision loss in her LE (20/100). FA indicated CNV in the
paramacular area in LE. FA and ICGA showed no signs of choriocapillaris inflammation in BE (Fig. 3a, b). We proposed to the patient an
intravitreal injection of ranibizumab as an off-label treatment option. She signed informed consent and was given a single injection of
ranibizumab (0.5 mg/0.05 mL) following the normal procedure. One month after the injection BCVA improved up to 20/40, the CNV showed
regression (Fig. 3c, d), and there was no need for retreatment up to her latest follow-up visit 1 year after the injection, when BCVA had
improved up to 20/25.Fig. 3Fluorescein angiography (FA) late frame and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) scan showing
choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in the paramacular area 2 months after the diagnosis of multiple evanescent white dot syndrome,
corresponding to a zone previously occupied by outer retinal inflammatory signs (a and b). FA late frame and SD-OCT scan 1 month after
intravitreal injection of ranibizumab, showing regression of the CNV (c and d) Fluorescein angiography (FA) late frame and spectral-domain
optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) scan showing choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in the paramacular area 2 months after the diagnosis
of multiple evanescent white dot syndrome, corresponding to a zone previously occupied by outer retinal inflammatory signs (a and b). FA
late frame and SD-OCT scan 1 month after intravitreal injection of ranibizumab, showing regression of the CNV (c and d) ASs are often
complicated by the appearance of CNV [2, 3]. To date there are no reports of AS associated with acute ocular inflammation. MEWDS is a
unilateral inflammatory disease, which usually resolves spontaneously, with full recovery . Here we describe a patient with ASs, who was
diagnosed with coincident MEWDS. Two months after this diagnosis she developed CNV, which was effectively treated by intravitreal
ranibizumab. In the current literature there are only six cases of CNV that developed after (from 4 weeks to 13 years) the diagnosis of
MEWDS [6–10, 12]. Only two were effectively treated by intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) [10, 12]. In all other
cases the visual loss was permanent despite treatment . The case described is unusual: the CNV occurred in a patient with ASs, 2 months
after the diagnosis of MEWDS. Although both ASs and MEWDS may contribute to the onset of CNV, the patient’s young age, good prognosis after
intravitreal ranibizumab and the presence of MEWDS involving the macular area may indicate an inflammatory etiology of the CNV. Though the
pathophysiologic mechanism remains unclear, it has been suggested that alterations of Bruch’s membrane or the outer retinal barrier caused
by choroidal inflammation may be associated with ischemic and/or inflammatory CNV . It has also been hypothesized that the inflammatory
processes induce the release of chemokines that favor angiogenesis . This patient was in fact younger than the mean age at which CNV usually
develops associated with ASs [15, 16]. Moreover, in this case a single intravitreal ranibizumab injection had a lasting effect (up to at
least 1 year), as shown by FA and OCT, and by the maintenance of good BCVA. Our results are in agreement with Rouvas et al. who have
described the good responses to intravitreal treatment with ranibizumab for inflammatory retinal diseases . This might be explained by the
different nature of the CNV, in which inflammation may have played an important pathogenic role, compared to other CNVs secondary to ASs
which tend to be associated with a worse visual prognosis, and need more injections . In this case of ASs, MEWDS completely resolved after 2
weeks, but 2 months later CNV developed. A single intravitreal injection of ranibizumab had a lasting effect. This illustrates the
importance of correct etiological assessment of CNVs, for proper therapeutic management. Although both ASs and MEWS may have contributed to
the CNV in our patient, an inflammatory pathogenesis must be considered, especially in young patients, where an idiopathic CNV may be the
first manifestation of inflammatory chorioretinal diseases . ASs, angioid streaks; CNV, choroidal neovascularization; MEWDS, multiple
evanescent white dot syndrome; BCVA, best-corrected visual acuity; RE, right eye; LE, left eye; BE, both eyes; FA, fluorescein angiography;
ICGA, indocyanine green angiography; SD-OCT, spectral-domain optical coherence tomography Supported by Retina 3000 Foundation. This study
received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors. No funding was obtained for this
study. All data supporting our findings are provided in the manuscript. AP, DA, SK, contributed to conception and design; AP, DA, GQ, LR, to
data acquisition, all authors contributed to interpretation of data; all authors drafted the article and approved its final version. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. The patient consented to the submission of the case report to the journal. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. The local ethics committee
ruled that no formal ethics approval was required in this particular case.
