Ileal pouch-related adenocarcinoma remains a rarity; thus, guidelines on treatment are currently lacking. We present this case of a 54-year-
old man who underwent restorative proctocolectomy with stapled ileal pouch–anal anastomosis formation for familial adenomatous polyposis
during the 1980s. Despite undergoing annual surveillance endoscopy, the patient was noted to be anaemic and passing fresh blood per anus.
Endoscopy and radiological investigation revealed the presence of a pouch-related adenocarcinoma. This was subsequently treated with short-
course radiotherapy and pouch excision. The patient remains well until now and will follow six-monthly surveillance protocols with a
transition to annual surveillance after 2 years. Since ileal pouch cancer remains a rarity, treatment guidelines and protocols are lacking.1
This presents a difficulty in their management. Optimal outcomes in rectal cancer are achieved when combined treatment modalities (ie,
chemotherapy and radiotherapy) are followed by mesenteric-based surgery.2–4 Examples of the latter include total mesorectal excision, total
mesocolic excision and complete mesocolic excision. The technical demands of these approaches increase dramatically in the reoperative
context where mesenteric planes (ie, mesofascial plane) may be difficult to identify amid adhesional complexes encountered. In keeping with
this, we present the case of a patient with a history of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) who, despite regular surveillance, developed a
pouch adenocarcinoma. The patient underwent neoadjuvant short-course radiotherapy followed by surgery involving a strictly anatomic-based
pouch excision. We report the case of a 54-year-old man with a background of restorative proctocolectomy and stapled ileal pouch anal
anastomosis performed in 1987 for FAP. The pathology report from the index operation indicated multiple adenomatous polyps throughout the
colon. There was no evidence of malignancy. Following this, the patient underwent yearly surveillance pouchoscopy and upper gastrointestinal
endoscopy. Prior to referral, he was anaemic and passing fresh blood per anus. There was no history of FAP in this patient's family. This
was a de novo adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) genetic mutation in this patient. Genetic mutation-specific testing yielded negative results
in this man's offspring. Pouchoscopy demonstrated a suspicious mucosal lesion in the distal pouch and biopsies confirmed an adenocarcinoma.
Histologically, the epithelial features were most in keeping with colorectal mucosa pointing to the possibility of either a retained rectal
remnant or normal pouch-related epithelial metaplasia. Oesophagogastroduodenoscopy was normal. Staging CT demonstrated irregular soft-tissue
attenuation within the ileal pouch consistent with pouchoscopy findings (figure 1). Abdominal CT identified extensive mesenteric
lymphadenopathy along the distribution of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). An incidental finding of a left adrenal gland lipid-rich
adenoma was made and confirmed using an adrenal-based CT protocol. The liver, spleen, pancreas, lungs and contralateral adrenal gland were
radiologically normal. MRI demonstrated signal abnormality of the posterior ileal pouch without visible extension through the bowel wall
(figure 2). Two large lymph nodes were noted, each with a diameter of 1.5 cm, in the pouch mesentery. Endoscopic ultrasound demonstrated a
well-defined lobulated solid mass lesion arising from mucosa, extending posteriorly and penetrating into overlying mesenteric fat between
the 6 and 8 o’clock positions. This pouch mass was located immediately above the upper anal sphincteric plate. Abnormally enlarged lymph
nodes were also noted adjacent to the SMA where the latter exits the pancreas to enter the small intestinal mesentery. Final preoperative
radiological staging was T3 N1b Mx. Intravenous and oral contrast computerised axial tomography demonstrating an ileal pouch. T2-weighted
MRI in a sagittal view of ileal pouch in situ postproctocolectomy. There is an area of ill-defined signal intensity along the posterior
aspect of the pouch without visible extension through the bowel wall. The multidisciplinary consensus recommended short-course neoadjuvant
radiotherapy in view of the possibility of lymphatic metastatic disease at an extraregional location. A cumulative dose of 25 Gy external-
beam radiotherapy was delivered over 5 consecutive days. The patient proceeded to surgery after 1 week of treatment completion and was
admitted for elective resection of the ileal pouch and anal canal, completion mesenterectomy and end ileostomy. Following general
anaesthesia, two 4.8 Fr×24 cm ureteric stents were placed under cystoscopic guidance. A midline laparotomy was performed through an old
scar. Extensive, dense adhesions were noted and careful adhesiolysis was performed. In this manner, the small intestinal mesentery was
detached from the retroperitoneum without breach, and retaining Toldt's fascia intact. The small intestine and associated mesentery was
divided 20 cm proximal to the ileal pouch and ∼300 cm of small intestine remained proximal to this. Once the plane between the small
intestinal mesentery and retroperitoneum was identified, it was followed to guide the pelvic dissection. The latter was carried out down to
the pelvic floor circumferentially. Radiation-related changes meant that the mesentery was attached (but not fused) to the surrounding
tissue. Using the above approach to mobilisation, the entire mesenteric package was maintained intact and fully detached to the pelvic floor
level. Finally, individual lymph nodes were resected along the SMA up to the level where it emerged from the body of the pancreas. An end
ileostomy was formed and matured in the right flank. In the prone position, the buttocks were taped back and the anal canal closed using a
purse-string suture. A church-window skin incision was made around the anal canal and deepened through the fat of the ischioanal space to
the pelvic floor. The latter was fully exposed circumferentially. The anococcygeal raphe was divided in the posterior midline and the
division extended anteriorly in a circumferential manner. As a result, the levator muscle was included in the resection, without going wide
enough to endanger the pudendal nerve and vessel in Alcock's canal. The ileal pouch was subsequently mobilised from the prostate, vas
deferens and seminal vesicles. The entire specimen was exteriorised en bloc and inspected. The perineal wound was closed using 2.0 Vicryl
sutures in layers and the skin wounds were apposed with 1.0 Ethilon nylon sutures in an uninterrupted fashion. Postoperatively, pain was
controlled using a morphine-based patient-controlled analgesia and regular intravenous paracetamol. Ureteric stents were removed in the
postoperative period. Early postoperative recovery was uncomplicated and the patient discharged. At follow-up, the patient reported of
perineal pain and CT investigation demonstrated a 4 cm pelvic collection. This was treated with intravenous antibiotics after which he was
transitioned to oral therapy. The collection discharged through the perianal wound and symptoms resolved. Postoperative histological
examination confirmed a 5 cm tumour at the anastomotic site. Microscopy revealed moderate to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with
infiltration through the bowel wall. Lymphovascular invasion was not seen. The circumferential, proximal and distal resection margins were
clear of malignancy. Four of 20 resected lymph nodes (in the pouch mesentery) had metastatic adenocarcinoma. The second anastomotic site was
free of tumour. Lymph nodes excised from the root of the SMA were free of metastatic disease. Final surgical staging was pT3 N2a Mx G2
adenocarcinoma of the ileal pouch. At the latest follow-up, his pelvic pain settled and all wounds were healed. The patient declined
adjuvant chemotherapy. Future surveillance will be six monthly followed by a transition to annual after 2 years. As per centre protocol,
serum carcinoembryonic antigen levels will be assessed going forward. Although 22 cases of FAP-related ileal pouch adenocarcinoma have been
reported,5 6 this is the first reported case of a patient who developed an adenocarcinoma within an ileal pouch and who underwent
neoadjuvant short-course radiotherapy, followed by pouchectomy. Of ileal pouch recurrences, the duration between index surgery and
recurrence is between 3 and 33 years (median=10 years). Seven patients were diagnosed with stage II disease with a further six stage III
reported. Additionally, Tajika et al6 reported 1 stage I and 1 stage IV patient with ileal pouch recurrence. In theory, patients undergoing
ileal pouch–anal anastomosis (IPAA) for FAP should also undergo mucosectomy, thereby reducing the risk of further cancer development.1
However, some of the earliest pouches fashioned may not have had an associated mucosectomy. Even despite synchronous mucosectomy at the time
of surgery, small areas of residual rectal mucosa may remain; thus, the risk of adenocarcinoma recurrence persists.5 This is notably the
case in patients undergoing a double-stapled anastomosis and has been demonstrated histologically.1 5–7 Centralisation and standardisation
of the technical approaches to index proctocolectomy and pouch formation could reduce the variation of amounts of residual rectal mucosa
seen, thus inferring more favourable outcomes in this patient cohort. However, should development of adenocarcinoma in residual rectal
mucosa occur, this may best be managed in accordance with principles of management of rectal cancer (ie, staging, neoadjuvant
chemoradiotherapy and adjuvant chemotherapy). Short-course preoperative pelvic radiotherapy involves delivery of 25 Gy in five daily
treatments over 1 week. It uses megavoltage X-rays (15 MV) delivered in a four-field box conformal technique. This is followed by surgery
1 week later. The Swedish Rectal Cancer Trial and the Dutch Commisse Klinisch Vergelijkend Onderzoek (CKVO) 95–04 trial demonstrated
improvements in local cancer control with short-course radiotherapy.8 9 This study also indicated that best results are achieved when the
short course is combined with total mesorectal excision.9 Traditionally, long-course chemoradiotherapy delivers ∼50.4 Gy of radiation in 28
fractions concurrently with chemotherapy followed by surgery within 6 weeks.10 However, radiation dosage and duration of treatment may vary
between centres. Additionally, the optimal interval between completion of chemoradiation and surgery remains unconfirmed.11 The German
Rectal Cancer Study used an interval of 6 weeks between completion of neoadjuvant treatment and surgery; consequently, most centres have
incorporated this timing. This study demonstrated improved local cancer control, reduced rates of recurrence and increased sphincter
preservation with combined neoadjuvant modalities.10 Short-course radiotherapy was used in the case presented here, given the radiological
evidence of mesenteric lymphatic metastases near the origin of the SMA. In the case presented, early surgery was advocated given (1) the
duration of long-course treatment and (2) concerns of SMA nodal spread. Debate persists regarding the relative benefits between short-course
and long-course chemoradiotherapy regimens. Cross-trial comparisons between both failed to identify differential benefits.12 In a randomised
trial comparing both, Ngan et al identified lower cumulative local recurrence rates in low rectal adenocarcinoma at 3 and 4 years in
patients assigned to the long-course chemoradiotherapy regimen group. However, the difference was not statistically significant.13 The
Trans-Tasman Radiation Oncology Group (TROG) study revealed no significant differences in toxicity and overall survival between both types
of treatment.13 This corroborated the conclusions made in the Polish long-term trial comparing the radiotherapy and chemoradiotherapy
cohorts.12 Our case illustrates the benefits of applying mesenteric principles in complex reoperative surgery. The abdominal component was
conducted according to strict mesenteric principles. Accordingly, the mesofascial plane between the small intestinal mesentery and subjacent
retroperitoneum was identified and used as an anatomic road map down into the pelvis. Although planar components were attached and
oedematous, they were not fused, which meant that the mesenteric package was maintained entirely intact. By adhering to the mesofascial
plane, serosal tears and full thickness enterotomy were entirely avoided and blood loss minimised. The mesofascial plane was followed
proximally to the origin of the mesentery where the SMA exits from the pancreas. In this case, enlarged lymph nodes present in this location
were also excised. In summary, it is well established that colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis does not entirely remove the risk of
metachronous cancer development in FAP.2 A risk of cancer development remains following proctocolectomy and IPAA formation. Smith et al5
suggest that the risk of malignancy following surgery for FAP increases with time.2 Therefore, despite the adopted procedure, the risk of
cancer recurrence following surgery for FAP remains such that intensive surveillance endoscopy should be adopted to identify pouch adenomas
and tumours early in their natural history. Notwithstanding this, IPAA formation remains an appropriate treatment option for patients with
FAP with a good postoperative quality of life and functional outcomes.1 Should a pouch adenocarcinoma arise, neoadjuvant short-course
radiotherapy followed shortly after by strictly anatomic-based pouchectomy may be safely conducted. Learning pointsThe risk of metachronous
cancer development in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is not eliminated following proctocolectomy and ileal pouch–anal
anastomosis (IPAA) formation.Intensive surveillance endoscopy should be adopted in order to identify pouch-related adenomas and tumours
early in their natural history.Should a pouch adenocarcinoma be identified, neoadjuvant short-course radiotherapy followed by pouchectomy
along strict anatomic planes may be safely conducted.Restorative proctocolectomy with IPAA formation remains the surgical standard of
treatment for patients of FAP. The risk of metachronous cancer development in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is not
eliminated following proctocolectomy and ileal pouch–anal anastomosis (IPAA) formation. Intensive surveillance endoscopy should be adopted
in order to identify pouch-related adenomas and tumours early in their natural history. Should a pouch adenocarcinoma be identified,
neoadjuvant short-course radiotherapy followed by pouchectomy along strict anatomic planes may be safely conducted. Restorative
proctocolectomy with IPAA formation remains the surgical standard of treatment for patients of FAP. Contributors: LGW contributed as the
first author to the paper and as a part of the surgical team caring for the particular patient. BJK conducted radiological studies as
outlined in the paper. MEB delivered neoadjuvant radiotherapy as per the paper. JCC was the surgical consultant performing the surgery and
leading in the care of this patient. Competing interests: None declared. Patient consent: Obtained. Provenance and peer review: Not
commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
