Gas gangrene is a necrotic infection of soft tissue associated with high mortality rates. We report a case of postoperative gas gangrene
with very acute onset and rapid progression of symptoms. To our knowledge, this case is the most acute onset of postoperative gas gangrene
ever reported. A 65-year-old Japanese female patient developed a shock state 16 h after radical cystectomy with ileal conduit
reconstruction. Two days after the operation, she was transferred to the intensive care unit because of deterioration in her respiratory and
circulatory condition. Soon after moving her to the ICU, a subcutaneous hemorrhage-like skin rash appeared and extended rapidly over her
left side. Blood tests performed on admission to the ICU indicated severe metabolic acidosis, liver and renal dysfunction, and signs of
disseminated intravascular coagulation. Suspecting necrotizing fasciitis or gas gangrene, we performed emergency fasciotomy. Subsequently,
multidisciplinary treatment, including empirical therapy using multiple antibiotics, mechanical ventilation, hyperbaric oxygen therapy,
polymyxin B-immobilized fiber column direct hemoperfusion, and continuous hemodiafiltration, was commenced. Culture of the debris from a
wound abscess removed by emergency fasciotomy detected the presence of Clostridium perfringens. We hypothesized that the source of infection
in this case may have been the ileum used for bladder reconstruction. Although the initial treatment prevented further clinical
deterioration, she developed secondary infection from the 3rd week onward, due to infection with multiple pathogenic bacteria. Despite
prompt diagnosis and intensive therapy, the patient died 38 days after the operation. Although the patient did not have any specific risk
factors for postsurgical infection, she developed a shock state only 16 h after surgery due to gas gangrene. Our experience highlights the
fact that physicians should be aware that any patient could possibly develop gas gangrene postoperatively. Gas gangrene is a rare and deadly
infection that progresses very rapidly. Although it is usually caused by traumatic injury, it can also occur after surgery . While the
timing of symptom onset varies among cases, it occurred at least 24 h after surgery in previous reports. Here, we report a case of gas
gangrene in which the clinical symptoms of sepsis appeared 16 h after urologic surgery. Although primary care was effective in this case,
the patient died 38 days after the surgery. To our knowledge, this case represents the most acute onset of postoperative gas gangrene ever
reported. A 65-year-old woman was diagnosed with bladder cancer 6 years earlier, for which she had undergone transurethral resection six
times. Oophorectomy for a right ovarian cyst and total hysterectomy for endometriosis had been performed under general anesthesia at the
ages of 30 and 35 years, respectively. During the current surgery, she underwent radical cystectomy with creation of an ileal conduit and
removal of pelvic lymph nodes. Her past history of multiple laparotomies resulted in intestinal adhesions and massive intraoperative
bleeding. The total blood loss during surgery was 5340 ml. She received 1200 ml of autologous blood transfusion, and subsequent transfusion
of 560 ml of red cell concentrates and 1200 ml of fresh-frozen plasma in the operation room. The surgical time was 6 h and 49 min.
Administration of the antibiotic isepamicin (ISP: 200 mg) was started to treat a fever of 40 °C immediately after moving her to the ward.
However, she developed a shock state 16 h after the operation (Fig. 1). Her systolic blood pressure decreased to approximately 70 mmHg and
urine output was less than 25 ml/h. Infusions of Ringer’s solution, albumin preparations, immunoglobulins, and vasopressors were started
because we suspected septic shock. Administration of imipenem/cilastatin sodium (IPM/CS: 500 mg) was added to ISP because we thought that
more intensive empiric antimicrobial therapy was necessary. Two days after the operation, she was transferred to the intensive care unit
(ICU) because of deterioration in her respiratory and circulatory condition. Soon after moving her to the ICU, a subcutaneous hemorrhage-
like skin rash appeared and extended rapidly over her left side (Fig. 2a). On admission to the ICU, blood tests indicated severe metabolic
acidosis, liver and renal dysfunction, and signs of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) (Table 1). Her APACHE II (Acute physiology
and chronic health evaluation) and SOFA (Sequential organ failure assessment) scores at this time were 24 and 14, respectively. An X-ray
examination and computed tomography (CT), which was performed on postoperative day 2, indicated uninterrupted massive emphysematous tissue
from her left chest to lower abdomen (Fig. 2b, c). Suspecting necrotizing fasciitis or gas gangrene, we performed emergency fasciotomy.
Subsequently, multidisciplinary treatment, including mechanical ventilation, hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT), polymyxin B-immobilized fiber
column direct hemoperfusion (PMX-DHP), and continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF), was started. Antibiotic therapy was changed to clindamycin
(CLDM: 900 mg), vancomycin (VCM: 1000 mg), and IPM/CS (Fig. 3). Gram-positive bacilli, but not Gram-negative bacteria, were detected by
microscopic examination of blister fluid aspirated from the skin rash. Moreover, a culture test detected Clostridium perfringens (C.
perfringens) in a wound abscess that was removed during the emergency fasciotomy. Based on these observations, she was diagnosed with gas
gangrene. HBOT was performed on the first and second ICU days. We had to abandon plans for a second fasciotomy because the area that
required treatment was too large. CHDF was continued through her ICU stay, although PMX-DMP was performed only once on the first ICU day.
Her APACHE II and SOFA scores continued to be flat during the first 2 weeks, indicating that the initial treatment prevented further
clinical deterioration (Fig. 3). However, she suffered from secondary infection from the 3rd week onward due to infection with multiple
pathogenic bacteria, including Candida albicans and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, as shown in Table 2. Finally, she died of sepsis 38 days after
the operation in spite of prompt diagnosis and intensive therapy for the gas gangrene.Fig. 1Vital signs of the patient on the day of and
after the surgery. The black and brown lines indicate systolic and diastolic blood pressure, respectively. Closed circles and open squares
indicate body temperature and heart rate, respectively. DOA dopamine hydrochlorideFig. 2Images of the patient. a A diffuse skin rash
developed over the left side of her trunk 2 days after the surgery. b Abdominal X-ray taken immediately after ICU admission showed soft
tissue swelling with the density of air on the left abdominal wall (arrows). c Computed tomography of the abdomen taken 2 days after the
surgery showed subcutaneous emphysema over the left side of the trunk (arrows). d Enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen taken 1 day
after the surgery. The rectangle indicates the area shown in e. e The arrows indicate air-densities between the subcutaneous fat tissue and
muscle layer in the vicinity of the left drainage tubeTable 1Results of blood tests performed immediately after ICU admissionBlood count Hct
(%)28.5 Hb (g/dl)9.2 WBC (/μl)7500 Plt (/μl)7.1 × 104 Blood coagulation tests PT (%)37 APTT (s)59.3 Fibrinogen (mg/dl)385 FDP
(μg/ml)47.3 d-dimer (μg/ml)39.1 TAT (ng/ml)36.1 PIC (μg/ml)1.3Biochemical tests T-bil (mg/dl)6.2 AST (IU/l)376 ALT (IU/l)41 LDH
(IU/l)3067 BUN (mg/dl)49 Cr (mg/dl)2.23 CRP (mg/dl)24.24Blood gas analysis pH7.265 pCO2 14.3 pO2 (FM 8L)91.7 HCO3 − (mmol/l)10.5 BE
(mmol/l)−20.6 Hct hematocrit, Hb hemoglobin, WBC white blood cells, Plt platelets, PT prothrombin time, APTT activated partial
thromboplastin time, FDP fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products, TAT thrombin-antithrombin complex, PIC plasmin-α2 plasmin inhibitor
complex, T-bil total bilirubin, AST aspartate aminotransferase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, LDH lactate dehydrogenase, BUN blood urea
nitrogen, Cr creatinine, CRP C-reactive protein, pCO 2 carbon dioxide partial pressure, pO 2 oxygen partial pressure, BE base
excessFig. 3The clinical course of the patient. FOM fosfomycin, ISP isepamicin, IPM/CS imipenem/cilastatin, CLDM clindamycin, VCM
vancomycin, FCZ fluconazole, CPFX ciprofloxacin, MEPM meropenem, CAZ ceftazidime, HBOT hyperbaric oxygen therapy, HD hemodialysis, CHDF
continuous hemodiafiltration, APACHE acute physiology and chronic health evaluation, SOFA sequential organ failure assessmentTable 2List of
the bacteria that were isolated and results of antimicrobial susceptibility testingSpeciesBacteria countSampling siteDate of
collectionReporting dateAntimicrobial susceptibility testingSusceptibleIntermediateResistant Clostridium perfringens 2+Closed
abscessPOD2POD6ABPC, ABPC/SBT, CMZ, FMOX, IPM, MINOLVFXCLDMSmall numberDrainPOD2POD9ABPC/SBT, IPM, MINOABPC, CMZ, FMOX, LVFXCLDM Pseudomonas
aeruginosa 3+DebrisPOD14POD17PIPC, CPZ, CAZ, CZOP, CFS, CFPM, MEPM, AZT, S/C, TOB, AMK, LVFX, CPFXIPM, GMFOM3+Open abscessPOD24POD28
Pseudomonas aeruginosa with metallo-β-lactamase3+Open abscessPOD33POD38PIPC, CAZ, CZOP, S/C, TOB, AMKCPZ, CFS, CFPM, GMIPM, MEPM, AZT, LVFX,
CPFX, FOM Candida albicans 2+DebrisPOD14POD17N/AN/AN/A2+Open abscessPOD24POD28N/AN/AN/A Staphylococcus epidermidis N/ACV
catheterPOD8POD15VCM, TEIC, LZDN/APCG, ABPC, MPIPC, CEZ, CTM, CPR, FMOX, IPM, GM, EM, CLDM, LVFX, ST, FOMN/AVenous blood, CV
catheterPOD14POD17VCM, TEICN/APCG, ABPC, MPIPC, CEZ, CTM, CPR, FMOX, IPM, GM, EM, CLDM, LVFX, ST, FOM Stenotrophomonas maltophilia 3+Open
abscessPOD24POD28MINO, STLVFXCAZ3+Open abscessPOD33POD38MINO, STN/ACAZ, LVFX Enterococcus casseliflavus 3+Open abscessPOD33POD38VCM, TEIC,
LZDN/ALVFX, ABPC, PCG, EM POD post-operative days, ABPC ampicillin, ABPC/SBT ampicillin/sulbactam, CMZ cefmetazole, FMOX flomoxef, IPM
imipenem, MINO minocycline, PIPC piperacillin, CPZ cefoperazone, CAZ ceftazidime, CZOP cefozopran, CFS cefsulodin, CFPM cefepime, MEPM
meropenem, AZT aztreonam, S/C sulbactam/cefoperazone, TOB tobramycin, AMK amikacin, LVFX levofloxacin, VCM vancomycin, TEIC teicoplanin, LZD
linezolid, ST sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim, GM gentamicin, CLDM clindamycin, FOM fosfomycin, CPFX ciprofloxacin, PCG benzylpenicillin,
MPIPC oxacillin, CEZ cephazolin, CTM cefotiam, CPR cefpirome, EM erythromycin Vital signs of the patient on the day of and after the
surgery. The black and brown lines indicate systolic and diastolic blood pressure, respectively. Closed circles and open squares indicate
body temperature and heart rate, respectively. DOA dopamine hydrochloride Images of the patient. a A diffuse skin rash developed over the
left side of her trunk 2 days after the surgery. b Abdominal X-ray taken immediately after ICU admission showed soft tissue swelling with
the density of air on the left abdominal wall (arrows). c Computed tomography of the abdomen taken 2 days after the surgery showed
subcutaneous emphysema over the left side of the trunk (arrows). d Enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen taken 1 day after the
surgery. The rectangle indicates the area shown in e. e The arrows indicate air-densities between the subcutaneous fat tissue and muscle
layer in the vicinity of the left drainage tube Results of blood tests performed immediately after ICU admission Hct hematocrit, Hb
hemoglobin, WBC white blood cells, Plt platelets, PT prothrombin time, APTT activated partial thromboplastin time, FDP fibrin/fibrinogen
degradation products, TAT thrombin-antithrombin complex, PIC plasmin-α2 plasmin inhibitor complex, T-bil total bilirubin, AST aspartate
aminotransferase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, LDH lactate dehydrogenase, BUN blood urea nitrogen, Cr creatinine, CRP C-reactive protein,
pCO 2 carbon dioxide partial pressure, pO 2 oxygen partial pressure, BE base excess The clinical course of the patient. FOM fosfomycin, ISP
isepamicin, IPM/CS imipenem/cilastatin, CLDM clindamycin, VCM vancomycin, FCZ fluconazole, CPFX ciprofloxacin, MEPM meropenem, CAZ
ceftazidime, HBOT hyperbaric oxygen therapy, HD hemodialysis, CHDF continuous hemodiafiltration, APACHE acute physiology and chronic health
evaluation, SOFA sequential organ failure assessment List of the bacteria that were isolated and results of antimicrobial susceptibility
testing POD post-operative days, ABPC ampicillin, ABPC/SBT ampicillin/sulbactam, CMZ cefmetazole, FMOX flomoxef, IPM imipenem, MINO
minocycline, PIPC piperacillin, CPZ cefoperazone, CAZ ceftazidime, CZOP cefozopran, CFS cefsulodin, CFPM cefepime, MEPM meropenem, AZT
aztreonam, S/C sulbactam/cefoperazone, TOB tobramycin, AMK amikacin, LVFX levofloxacin, VCM vancomycin, TEIC teicoplanin, LZD linezolid, ST
sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim, GM gentamicin, CLDM clindamycin, FOM fosfomycin, CPFX ciprofloxacin, PCG benzylpenicillin, MPIPC oxacillin,
CEZ cephazolin, CTM cefotiam, CPR cefpirome, EM erythromycin Here, we report a fatal case of postoperative gas gangrene with very acute
onset and rapid progression of the symptoms. This case report especially focuses on the risk factors, cause of infection, and treatment
methods of postoperative gas gangrene. Gas gangrene used to be frequent during war times, being related to weapon injuries . In modern
clinical practice, the various causes of gas gangrene have included “sterile” operations, intravenous infusion, intramuscular injection, and
criminal abortion, etc. . Even if a patient does not have any evident infectious causes, recent abdominal surgical intervention can also
contribute to gas gangrene formation. Indeed, several cases of gas gangrene with C. perfringens after abdominal surgery have been recently
reported [2, 3]. The onset of symptoms in these cases was 2 weeks and 2 days after the operation, respectively. To our knowledge, our case
represents the most acute onset of postoperative gas gangrene with C. perfringens ever reported. It is well known that both the existence of
cancer cells and exposure to anesthetic agents can suppress the immune system, which in turn increases the risk of surgical site infection .
In addition, gas gangrene occurs more frequently in diabetics, alcoholics, immunosuppressed patients, IV drug users, and patients with
peripheral vascular disease . The risk of postoperative infection in our case may have been increased by the long operation and massive
blood transfusion . However, the patient had a past history of exposure to neither anticancer nor immunosuppressive agents. Moreover, she
did not have any preexisting co-morbidities other than hyperthyroidism. Hence, she was not considered to have a particularly high risk for
development of postoperative gas gangrene. Thus, the cause of fulminant infection with C. perfringens in this patient with no remarkable
risk factors is unknown. Molecular typing of toxins and enzymes involved in the virulence of C. perfringens seems to be a powerful tool to
clarify this issue. However, we did not assess the toxins and enzymes, which is a limitation of this case report. We hypothesized that the
source of infection in this case might have been the ileum used for bladder reconstruction. Urinary diversion via the bowel might contribute
to contamination by bowel microbes . In general, two conditions are necessary for the onset of gas gangrene: (1) the presence of clostridial
spores, and (2) an area of tissue hypoperfusion caused by circulatory failure in a local area or by extensive soft tissue damage and
necrotic muscle tissue. The occurrence of clostridial species in feces is not rare, a large number of clostridia having been found to be
present in normal human feces (106–109/g feces) . In particular, C. perfringens was reportedly detected in 33 % of healthy Japanese adults,
and at a concentration of at least 103/g feces . These indicate that endogenous clostridial spores that probably existed in her ileum may
have spread into the surgical wound. Abdominal enhanced CT images obtained 1 day after the operation (Fig. 2d, e) showed the presence of
air-densities between the subcutaneous fat tissue and muscle layer in the vicinity of the drainage tubes. These CT images support our
hypothesis that the drainage tube might have been the source of the C. perfringens infection. Urgent surgical exploration and debridement of
devitalized tissue are crucial for the treatment of gas gangrene. In addition, aggressive antibiotic treatment is also important. The first
choice of antibiotics for Clostridium is penicillin . However, we could not use penicillin because she had developed hypersensitivity
responses to penicillin with shock at the age of approximately 20 years. Hence, we used IPM/CS and CLDM, which are considered the second
choice for Clostridium. It was recently reported that CLDM resistant C. perfringens species are on the increase . In this case, CLDM
resistant C. perfringens was detected in the wound abscess. Therefore, we had to discontinue use of CLDM. Although C. perfringens was
abolished by our intensive therapy, multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa caused multi-organ failure and, ultimately, death. Similar to
what has been seen in many cases of severe sepsis, the secondary infection was likely due to a combination of neutropenia and an adverse
reaction to broad spectrum antibiotics. Despite remarkable progress of multidisciplinary therapeutic methods, including extensive surgical
debridement, antibiotic coverage and HBOT, the morbidity and mortality rates of gas gangrene are still very high (up to 57 %) [13, 14].
Given this high mortality rate of gas gangrene, physicians should be aware that any patient could possibly develop gas gangrene after an
operation. isepamicin imipenem/cilastatin sodium intensive care unit acute physiology and chronic health evaluation II sequential organ
failure assessment computed tomography hyperbaric oxygen therapy polymyxin B-immobilized fiber column direct hemoperfusion continuous
hemodiafiltration clindamycin vancomycin Clostridium perfringens TT and TH wrote the manuscript. JO, HH, FK, and SS treated the patient. FK
and SS revised and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank Dr. Jiro Kamiyama for
the helpful discussions. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Before the surgery, the patient gave consent for
possible publication of her case report and any accompanying images if it should be necessary. In addition, we got consent for publication
from her husband and son after her in-hospital death. Contributions to funding this manuscript were obtained from the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science, Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research, 15K10533.
