Myxoid/round cell liposarcoma is the second most common subtype of liposarcoma. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy have a limited efficacy for
treating advanced myxoid/round cell liposarcoma, with relatively serious side effects. We herein present a 68-year-old Chinese woman
initially diagnosed with advanced multiple intra-abdominal and pelvic round cell liposarcoma. She refused to receive cytotoxic chemotherapy
and received apatinib as the first-line therapy, a novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 that has
been used in the treatment of patients with metastatic gastric cancer who progressed with 2 or more chemotherapy regimens. This patient was
partially responsive to apatinib with a dose of 500 mg daily. No serious drug-related side effects were observed. Our findings indicate that
some cases of liposarcoma may be responsive to antiangiogenic agent apatinib. Randomized clinical studies are needed to further confirm the
efficacy and safety of apatinib in the clinical treatment of liposarcoma. Soft tissue sarcomas (STSs) represent a rare and heterogeneous
group of malignant tumors with mesenchymal origin that affect approximately 1% of all adult malignancies. Liposarcomas appear to originate
from precursors of adipocytes and are the most common type of malignant soft tissue sarcomas, representing at least 20% of all sarcomas in
adults. The four main morphologic subgroups are well-differentiated, dedifferentiated, myxoid/round cell, and pleomorphic liposarcomas.
There is a great range of biologic behavior amongst these subtypes. Myxoid/round cell liposarcoma (MRLS) is the second most common subtype
of liposarcoma, accounting for 20% to 50% of all liposarcoma. Although World Health Organization (WHO) considers MRLS as a combined subtype,
and myxoid and round cell liposarcoma variants share the same reciprocal translocation t(12;16)(q13;p11), round cell liposarcomas are
considered high grade and were more likely to metastasize to extrapulmonary organs, most commonly the abdomen, than well-differentiated and
myxoid liposarcomas. Most liposarcomas are initially found in the lower extremities and retroperitoneum, whereas primary intra-abdominal and
pelvic liposarcomas are considered as uncommon events. Bowel obstruction, bleeding, and perforation can be usually generated by intra-
abdominal invasion of liposarcoma. Surgical resection is the only potentially curative treatment for localized liposarcomas. However, most
patients receiving surgery will ultimately relapse or metastasize, and some patients are unresectable because of metastatic, extensive
involvement, or the presence of multiple peritoneal implants at the time of initial diagnosis. Although radiotherapy and cytotoxic
chemotherapy have been used for clinical management of metastatic or unresectable liposarcomas, the efficacy with regular treatment for
advanced liposarcomas is limited, and most cases received best supportive care only. Apatinib (Hengrui Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Shanghai,
China), an orally bioavailable small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor selectively targeting vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2
(VEGFR-2), has a survival benefit for patients with advanced gastric cancer in phase II and III trials. In 2014, apatinib was approved by
China State Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of patients with metastatic gastric cancer who received two or more lines of
prior chemotherapy. Given its potent inhibition of VEGFR-2 signaling pathway, this antiangiogenic agent also shows wide potential efficacy
in a variety of solid tumors including metastatic lung, colon, and breast cancer. We herein report a case of round cell liposarcoma in which
apatinib produced an excellent tumor response, without serious treatment-associated side effects. In September 2015, a 68-year-old Chinese
woman visited our hospital with a 6-month history of upper abdominal fullness sensation and weight loss, and with 1-month abdominal masses,
but there was not direct pain associated with the masses. Physical examinations showed a distended abdomen with multiple, non-tender, and
immobile abdominal masses, without any signs of peritonitis. Abdominal ultrasonography showed multiple masses containing cystic and solid
components, with a giant one measuring 20 × 14 × 9 cm that located in the left abdomen. A computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated
extensive soft tissue mass lesions with heterogeneous density in abdominal and pelvic locations (Fig. 1). The masses were extended to small
intestine, uterus, and bladder. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan revealed high fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG)
uptake up to SUVmax 12.1 for most hypermetabolic abdominal and pelvic masses, with a metastatic lesion in the liver (Fig. 2). A computed
tomography scan showed coexisting abdominal and pelvic masses (A and D) at the time of initial diagnosis. The size of mass lesions in
abdominal and pelvic locations decreased significantly following treatment with apatinib of 500 mg daily (B, C, E, and F). Maximum intensity
projection images (A and B) and positron emission tomography/computed tomography fusion images (C, D, E, and F) show heterogeneous
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in multiple abdominal and pelvic masses. Maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of the masses is 12.1.
This patient had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score of 2. Laboratory testing, including blood routine, biochemical, and
urinalysis, revealed some abnormal results (hemoglobin: 102 g/L; albumin: 29.1 g/L; bile acid: 21.0 μmol/L). Fine-needle aspiration for the
mass with maximum size was taken, and pathological report revealed the diagnosis of a round cell liposarcoma with immunohistochemistry
results: vimentin (+), P504S (+), S-100 (partly +), CK (−), p16 (−), and EMA (partly +). At immunohistochemistry, the section showed
positive staining for CD31 and CD34, and strong expression of VEGFR-2 protein in tumor cells (Fig. 3). The patient was initially diagnosed
with myxoid/round cell liposarcoma by fine-needle aspiration. (A) Hematoxylin and eosin stain (400× magnification). The section showed
negative staining for p16 (B), positive staining for CD31 (C) and CD34 (D) and a large number of immature and intermediate blood vessels
were found in the tumor area. (E) A strong positive staining for VEGFR-2 was also found in most cancer cells (immunostaining, 200×
magnification). This patient did not receive surgery interaction and radiotherapy because of extensive lesions and metastasis to the liver.
She refused to receive thermotherapy. After providing written and informed consent, this patient was administrated with apatinib (500 mg
daily) on October 12, 2015. After nearly 1 month of treatment with apatinib, the upper abdominal fullness sensation and weight loss were
relieved significantly. The size of abdominal and pelvic masses was significantly decreased. The middle and right abdominal mass
approximately diminished, and the metastatic lesion in the liver remained stable (Fig. 1). The latest follow-up with CT scan was conducted
on April 15, 2016. The patient is still alive without progression. Overall, this patient got a partial response to apatinib treatment. In
addition, the levels of hemoglobin and albumin were within their normal ranges. Treatment-related side effects were monitored weekly during
apatinib treatment. The side effects included hematologic and nonhematologic toxicities. Hypertension (grade 2) and elevated transaminase
(grade 1) were mainly nonhematologic toxicities. Thrombocytopenia (grade 2) was found at the third week of apatinib treatment. Hypertension
was controlled well by administration with antihypertensive drugs. No grade 3 to 4 side effects and other treatment-associated toxicities
such as proteinuria and hand–foot syndrome were observed. This patient did not have tumor lysis syndrome. She continued to receive apatinib
at a maintenance dose of 500 mg daily and tolerated well without serious side effects. Liposarcomas are the most common subtype of all soft
tissue sarcomas. Although liposarcomas may arise in any region of body that contains fat, coexisting primary intra-abdominal and pelvic
liposarcomas are uncommon. Round cell liposarcoma variant is regarded as a histologic progression of pure myxoid liposarcoma to
hypercellular round cell morphology (>5% round cell phenotype). Myxoid liposarcomas with a round cell component may behave aggressively.
Surgery resection is the standard of care for MRLS patients with localized disease, but complete surgical resection is achieved in less than
70% of these patients due to close proximity to vital organs. About 25% of patients will develop metastatic distant disease after successful
treatment of their primary tumor. Patients with giant round cell liposarcoma (tumors >10 cm) have a high risk of recurrence and metastasis,
especially in extrapulmonary locations. On the other hand, metastatic MRLS are related to more poor survival compared with localized
disease. Surgical interventions seem to be associated with improved disease-specific survival. Although surgery is offered as standard
treatment, the decision-making should be multidisciplinary and be made on a case by case basis, especially for metachronous resectable lung
metastasis without extrapulmonary spread. In addition, chemotherapy remains the standard treatment for extrapulmonary metastatic disease. In
highly selected individual cases, surgery may be considered as an option, taking into consideration tumor locations, the underlying
histology of the tumor, the natural history of the disease, and expected responsiveness to systemic therapy. Palliative chemotherapy with or
without radiotherapy are usually reserved for other advanced MRLS, with an improved progression-free survival (PFS). Recent report showed
that helical tomotherapy-based intraperitoneal radiotherapy might be a new option of salvage treatment for patients with liposarcoma with
multiple peritoneal seeding. Understanding of the distinct subgroup of soft tissue sarcoma helps develop and introduce novel targeted
therapies for this disease. For example, imatinib has shown significant efficacy in the treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumors with a
functional mutation in the c-KIT gene. In addition, angiogenesis inhibitors have produced significant advances in the clinical treatment of
several tumors including lung, colorectal, ovarian, and renal carcinomas. A majority of soft tissue sarcomas have been discovered to have
the increased expression levels of proangiogenic growth factors that contribute tumor angiogenesis, growth, and progression. Microvessel
density was especially higher in liposarcoma and malignant fibrous histiocytoma. In a phase II study, sunitinib showed potent activity in
metastatic liposarcomas, with a median PFS of 3.9 months. The 3-month PFS rates in the untreated and pretreated liposarcoma patients were
75.0% and 69.2%, respectively. Other targeted drugs such as sorafenib, pazopanib in combination with or without radiotherapy appeared to
demonstrate acceptable antitumor activity in liposarcomas. Apatinib, a compound derived from valatinib, is an oral, highly potent inhibitor
of VEGFR-2 tyrosine kinase targeting the intercellular ATP-binding site of the receptor, downregulating the phosphorylation, and subsequent
downstream signaling. The antitumor activity and inhibition of angiogenesis of apatinib was investigated in different established human
tumor xenograft model. In vitro studies showed that apatinib exerted a significant inhibition of the kinase activities of VEGFR-2, c-kit,
and c-src, and suppression of cellular phosphorylation of VEGFR-1, c-kit, and PDGFRβ. In the phase III study of apatinib, patients were
randomized to receive oral apatinib (850 mg once daily) or placebo at a ratio of 2:1. Apatinib significantly improved median overall
survival (OS) time (6.5 months vs 4.7 months; P = 0.015) and PFS time (2.6 months vs 1.8 months; P < 0.001) in metastatic gastric cancer
patients who progressed on two or more lines of chemotherapy. Hand-foot syndrome, proteinuria, and hypertension were the most common
treatment-related nonhematologic adverse events of apatinib, similar to other antiangiogenic agents. However, serious side effects, such as
gastrointestinal massive hemorrhage and perforation, were not observed in the treatment arm. Only Li et al recently presented a case of
gastrointestinal massive hemorrhage and perforation during treatment of advanced gastric cancer with oral apatinib as the third-line
chemotherapy. In addition, apatinib also showed potent activity against lung, breast and, colon cancer. Ji et al recently reported the first
case of advanced malignant fibrous histiocytoma of the right forearm that had a partial response to apatinib. The patient in this case
report presented with extensive intra-abdominal and pelvic lesions and metastatic disease to the liver, with round cell liposarcoma variant,
and refused to receive chemotherapy for palliation only. She was also recommended to receive sunitinib based on the data from a phase II
study showing the efficacy of sunitinib in patients with advanced liposarcoma. However, she did not afford the cost of sunitinib and finally
choose apatinib. Administration with apatinib monotherapy produced a promising response, with manageable side effects. At
immunohistochemistry, the section showed positive staining for CD31 and CD34. A large number of immature and intermediate blood vessels were
found in the tumor area, and a strong positive staining for VEGF-2 was also observed in most cancer cells. Thus, these findings seem to be
in line with the efficacy of the application of the antiangiogenic therapy for this patient. As a novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor of
VEGFR-2, apatinib has been only approved by China State Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of metastatic gastric cancer
refractory to chemotherapy as a third-line treatment option. In this case report, it exerted good efficacy and safety in the treatment of a
variety of solid tumors. A subgroup of advanced liposarcomas may be responsive to apatinib. It is possible that apatinib might be a feasible
option in liposarcoma as the first treatment in metastatic setting. Large retrospective and prospective trials are needed to further confirm
the efficacy and safety of apatinib in the clinical treatment of liposarcomas and other type of sarcomas. We sincerely thank the patient for
her contribution to the publication of this case report. Abbreviations: 18F-FDG = fluorodeoxyglucose, CT = computed tomography, ECOG =
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, MRLS = myxoid/round cell liposarcomas, OS = overall survival, PET/CT = positron emission
tomography/computed tomography, PFS = progression-free survival, STSs = soft tissue sarcomas, VEGFR-2 = vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor-2, WHO = World Health Organization. This case report was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of General Hospital, Jinan
Command of the People's Liberation Army. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's family for publication of this case report
and accompanying images. All authors contributed toward data collection and analysis, drafting and critical revision of this paper, gave
final approval of the version to be published, and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work. Funding/support: This study was
supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 81272619 and 81572875). The authors have no conflicts
of interest to disclose.
