Pancreatic panniculitis is a very rare complication of pancreatic cancer, most often accompanying rare acinar cell carcinoma. We herein
report a case of pancreatic panniculitis that was associated with pancreatic mucinous adenocarcinoma. A 57-year-old male was referred to our
hospital for weight loss. A physical examination revealed subcutaneous nodules on his lower extremities. The blood test showed abnormal
increases in amylase, lipase, and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 levels. A computed tomography scan detected a hypodense 2 × 1.5 cm solid mass
with an unclear margin in the head of the pancreas. The biopsy of subcutaneous nodules on the lower extremities was conducted and revealed
lobular panniculitis. Pancreatic cancer and pancreatic panniculitis were strongly suspected. After the administration of octreotide acetate
and the Whipple procedure, the serous amylase and lipase levels returned to normal, and the pancreatic panniculitis had almost resolved by 4
weeks later. Pancreatic panniculitis is a rare complication of pancreatic cancer. However, in the presence of a pancreatic mass, as in this
case, clinicians should be aware that panniculitis may be the sentinel of pancreatic carcinoma. Pancreatic panniculitis (PP) is the rare
necrosis of subcutaneous fat and occurs in ∼0.3% to 1% of all patients with pancreatic disease. PP has been reported in acute and chronic
pancreatitis and pancreatic neoplasms (acinar cell carcinoma in 80% of cases). We herein report a rare case of PP that was associated with
pancreatic mucinous adenocarcinoma. A 57-year-old male who complained of multiple subcutaneous nodules on his lower legs for ∼4 months
without any other history presented to the hospital due to weight loss that began ∼2 months ago. A physical examination upon admission
revealed multiple edematous erythematous, tender, ill-defined, subcutaneous nodules ∼1.5 cm in diameter with heat and fluctuation on the
lower extremities but without swelling or pain (Fig. 1A). No knee or ankle joint pain or abdominal symptoms were detected. Subcutaneous
nodule on the lower extremities. (A) Tender erythematous subcutaneous nodules on the lower extremities; (B) necrosis with nuclear debris and
“ghost” cells’ characterized by anucleated adipocytes with partially digested shadowy cell membranes. The blood test revealed increases in
amylase (AMY) (2161U/L; reference range 25–115U/L), lipase (LIP) (27575U/L; reference range 73–393U/L), carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19–9)
(69.8U/mL; reference range 0–34.0 U/mL), gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) (463U/L; reference range 10–60U/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
(194U/L; reference range 45–125U/L), aspartate transaminase (AST) (71U/L; reference range 15–40U/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (120U/L;
reference range 9–50U/L), c-reactive protein (CRP) (16.90 mg/L; reference range 0–3 mg/L) and eosinophil percentage (EOS%) (6.4%; reference
range 0.5–5.0%). Albumin (ALB) (162 mg/L; reference range 200–400 mg/L), apolipoprotein-A1 (ApoA1) (0.94 g/L; reference range
1.05–1.75 g/L), and apolipoprotein-B (Apo-B) (0.57 g/L; reference range 0.6–1.4 g/L) levels were slightly decreased. The white blood cell
count and IgG and IgG4 levels were normal. A computed tomography (CT) scan detected a hypodense 2 × 1.5 cm solid mass with an unclear margin
in the head of the pancreas with homogenous lower enhancement compared to the surrounding pancreatic parenchyma by intravenous contrast in
the arterial phase (Fig. 2A). In addition, we observed an expanded primary pancreatic duct and inter- and extra-bile ducts in addition to
cholecyst and multiple cystic lesions in the swollen pancreas with rough edges (Fig. 2B and C). Positron emission tomography-computed
tomography revealed a malignant mass in the pancreatic head (Fig. 2D). We conducted a biopsy of the subcutaneous nodules on the lower
extremities. The pathology results indicated lobular panniculitis with foci of necrosis and “ghost” cells characterized by anucleated
adipocytes with partially digested shadowy cell membranes (Fig. 1B). Pancreatic cancer and PP were strongly suspected. Imaging findings from
the pancreatic tumor. (A) Computed tomography detected a 2 × 1.5 cm hypodense solid mass with an unclear margin in the head of the pancreas;
(B) expanded primary pancreatic duct and the cystic low density in the tail of pancreas; (C) cystic low density in the uncinate process of
the pancreas; (D) PET-CT revealed a malignant mass in the pancreatic head. Because of the high levels of AMY and LIP, which increased to
4129U/L and 58412U/L after admission, sandostain (octreotide acetate injection) was administered after obtaining informed consent. The
serous AMY and LIP levels decreased to 649U/L and 6170U/L, respectively, 7 days later. Additionally, the size and amount of erythematous
subcutaneous nodules on the lower legs decreased. After exhaustive explanation of the condition, the patient underwent the Whipple
procedure. A biopsy of the resected tumor revealed mucinous adenocarcinoma (Fig. 3). The serous AMY and LIP levels returned to normal, and
the PP had almost resolved 4 weeks later. Pathological findings (hematoxylin/eosin staining): pancreatic mucinous adenocarcinoma. PP is the
rare necrosis of subcutaneous fat and occurs in ∼0.3% to 1% of all patients with pancreatic disease. PP has been reported in acute and
chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic neoplasms (acinar cell carcinoma in 80% of the cases). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report describing subcutaneous panniculitis associated with pancreatic mucinous adenocarcinoma. Clinically, panniculitis presents as
erythematous, ill-defined, red-brown nodules that are usually located on the lower extremities but can also appear on the arms, trunk, and
breasts. Distinctive laboratory values include eosinophilia and raised serum lipase levels, which are related to the advance of PP. The
pathogenesis of PP is not well understood. Exocrine acinar cancer cells produce lipase and other digestive enzymes and may release the
hydrolase into circulation. However, ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, such as in this case, may not produce sufficiently high levels
of circulating hydrolase to induce subcutaneous fat necrosis. One possible explanation is that pancreatic enzymes may not be the only
etiological factor; an immunological process (such as alpha–antitrypsin deficiency) can initiate subcutaneous necrosis. The treatment of PP
should be directed to the underlying pancreatic diseases. No other therapeutic agents have been shown to help eliminate the skin eruptions.
In this case, PP regressed 2 weeks after the Whipple procedure. In conclusion, clinicians should be aware that panniculitis may be the
sentinel of pancreatic carcinoma and may precede common manifestations. Only a minority of subcutaneous panniculitis cases are associated
with pancreatic disease. However, in the presence of a pancreatic mass, as in our case, the diagnosis of carcinoma should strongly be
considered. Abbreviations: ALB = albumin, ALP = alkaline phosphatase, ALT = alanine aminotransferase, AMY = amylase, ApoA1 =
apolipoprotein-A1, Apo-B = apolipoprotein-B, AST = aspartate transaminase, CA19–9 = carbohydrate antigen 19–9, CRP = c-reactive protein, CT
= computed tomography, EOS = eosinophils, GGT = gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, LIP = lipase, PP = pancreatic panniculitis. GZ, ZC, and GY
contributed equally to this study. Funding: This study was supported by grants from the Research Special Fund for Public Welfare Industry of
Health (No. 201202007), the National Science & Technology Pillar Program during the Twelfth Five-year Plan Period (No. 2014BAI09B11), the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81472327), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities and the PUMC
Youth Fund (No. 3332015004). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
