Pseudoaneurysm of the aortic arch is uncommonly associated with cancer, and is extremely rare in pulmonary cancer. Here, we report an
unusual and successfully treated case of aortic arch pseudoaneurysm in a male patient with lung squamous cell carcinoma. A 64-year-old male
patient was admitted to the Emergency Department, presenting with massive hemoptysis (>500 mL blood during the 12 hours prior to treatment).
The diagnosis of aortic arch pseudoaneurysm was confirmed after inspection of computed tomographic angiography and three-dimensional
reconstruction. We processed the immediate endovascular stent-grafting for this patient. This patient recovered with no filling or
enlargement of the pseudoaneurysm, no episodes of hemoptysis, and no neurological complications during the 4-week follow-up period. Herein,
we compare our case with other cancer-related pseudoaneurysms in the medical literature and summarize the clinical features and treatment of
this unusual case. Pseudoaneurysms result from a variety of causes, including trauma, infection, vasculitis, and artherosclerosis or
iatrogenicities. As a relatively fatal disease, aortic pseudoaneurysm has a high mortality rate as a result of the high tension of the
edematous aortic wall, which causes the rupture. Therefore, this disease should be treated soon after diagnosis. Currently, there are no
reports about spontaneous aortic arch pseudoaneurysm rupture causing hemoptysis in patients with pulmonary cancer. In this study, the
endovascular stent-grafting treatment provided a good outcome for the pulmonary cancer patient, who presented with spontaneous aortic arch
pseudoaneurysm bleeding. A 64-year-old Chinese male patient was admitted to the Emergency Department, presenting with massive hemoptysis
(>500 mL blood during the 12 hours prior to treatment), accompanied by chest distress and shortness of breath. The patient was a tobacco
smoker (one pack of cigarettes daily for 40 years) and had taken amlodipine besylate to treat hypertension for 7 years. No history of
previous cardiovascular or respiratory diseases or trauma was recorded. The patient had a temperature of 37.4°C, heart rate of
123 beats/min, respiratory rate of 35 breaths/min, and blood pressure of 127/82 mm Hg (1 mm Hg = 0.133 kPa). The general physical
examination was unremarkable, except for rough sound of breath heard on the pulmonary examination. On admission, the laboratory
characteristic results for this patient were as shown in Table 1, which indicated infection, mild metabolic acidosis, and impaired cardiac
function. The liver and renal function tests were all normal. Sinus tachycardia was found on the electrocardiogram, which was consistent
with the characteristics of hemorrhage. Consequently, pulmonary enhanced computed tomography (CT) detected a space-occupying lesion in the
left upper lobe of the lung with peripheral obstructive pneumonia, as well as a suspected aortic arch pseudoaneurysm. The images of further
computed tomographic angiography (CTA) and three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction were consistent with the diagnosis shown on the pulmonary
enhanced CT. CTA images revealed bilateral lung infection, the leakage of the pseudoaneurysm at the distal part of the left subclavian
artery (LSA), and the space-occupying lesion in the left upper lung, which just encircled the pseudoaneurysm (Fig. 1A and B). Multiple
mediastinal lymph node enlargements were also found. Taking into account the bleeding of the aortic arch pseudoaneurysm, the endovascular
stent graft (31 mm × 150 mm, W.L. Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ) was promptly implanted in this patient, under general endotracheal
anesthesia and digital subtraction angiography. The operation went smoothly, and postoperative angiography showed that the shape and
location of the stent-graft were satisfactory; with no endoleak or migration observed. After surgery, this patient was transferred to the
Emergency Intensive Care Unit (EICU) for continuous monitoring. Antibiotics, hemostatic medications, and fluids were continuously
administered intravenously for 3 days. The characteristic results of the patient underwent the laboratory investigations on admission.
Preoperative CTA: thoracic CT scan showing an irregular wall at the level of the aortic arch, which is an aortic arch pseudoaneurysm (A, B).
Follow-up CTA: CTA on the 5th postoperative day showed the shape and the location of the stent-graft were satisfactory, and no evidence of
endoleak, filling, or enlargement of the pseudoaneurysm (C–F). CT = computed tomography, CTA = computed tomography angiography. The patient
recovered favorably from the operation, without complications. The severe hemoptysis was controlled immediately after surgery, except for a
little blood-tinged sputum. The above symptoms, including the chest pain and shortness of breath, disappeared on the 4th postoperative day.
On the 5th day, follow-up CTA showed no filling or enlargement of the pseudoaneurysm (Fig. 1C–F). Meanwhile, the space-occupying lesion in
the left upper lobe of the lung was considered to be malignant, based on a positron emission tomography (PET)-CT examination after the
operation. Later, a bronchoscopic biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. On the 10th day, the procalcitonin (PCT) level
decreased to 0.05 ng/mL (reference range 0–0.5 ng/mL) and the C-reactive protein (CRP) level dropped to 42.10 mg/L (reference range
0–8.0 mg/L). However, the related biochemical indicators, including blood lactic acid, arterial blood gas, and serum N-terminal brain
natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), returned to normal. He was discharged uneventfully from the hospital after 14 days, and his white blood
cell count (WBC) decreased to 7.6 × 109 cells/L with 65.1% neutrophils. No recurrent episodes of hemoptysis or neurological complications
were noted in the following 4 weeks. The patient was transferred to the Department of Oncology for further treatment of pulmonary cancer
after 2 weeks of recovery. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient when he was admitted to our hospital. The study was
approved by the Research Ethics Committee of First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University. We performed a search on
PubMed (National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD) using the terms “Pseudoaneurysm” and “Pulmonary cancer” retrieving all available
articles published in English up to March 2016. We combined these data with our new case report to describe the characteristics of this
aortic arch pseudoaneurysm case. According to the above clinical data, the lung squamous cell carcinoma complicated by aortic arch
pseudoaneurysm mainly caused the massive hemoptysis in this patient. It is well known that pulmonary cancer is one of the common causes of
hemoptysis; sometimes it even causes massive bleeding. The massive hemoptysis, which is considered a life-threatening condition, requires
effective and timely management. In our case, since this patient's hemoptysis was controlled rapidly after the endovascular stent graft
implantation, we believe that the massive hemoptysis in this patient resulted from the leaking or bleeding of the complicated aortic arch
pseudoaneurysm, rather than the pulmonary cancer alone. In addition, the results of the initial hemogram showed the high WBC count with an
elevated neutrophil count, which we speculated were as a result of the infection, stress, or leukemoid reaction. However, the WBC count
returned to normal after endovascular stent graft placement and antibiotic treatment; therefore, the possibility of leukemoid reaction was
primarily ruled out. Pseudoaneurysm of the aortic arch is usually a rare complication after thoracic surgery or trauma; it is fatal when the
rupture occurs from the power of the aortic flow. Moreover, aortic arch pseudoaneurysm due to cancer is generally uncommon and is extremely
rare in pulmonary cancer. There are a few reports on cancer-related pulmonary vasculature pseudoaneurysms, and some described cases of
pulmonary vasculature pseudoaneurysms arising in aggressive lung squamous cell carcinoma. Small pulmonary vasculature pseudoaneurysm lesions
under low pressure often resolve spontaneously when the mean pulmonary artery pressure (MPAP) is 12 to 16 mm Hg. However, the mean artery
pressure (MAP) of healthy people is 70 to 105 mm Hg, approximately 6 times MPAP. In our case, this patient's MAP was 78 mm Hg on initial
physical examination in our hospital, and this cancer-related pseudoaneurysm growth after aggressive lung squamous cell carcinoma was a
result of vascular destruction. In addition, hypertension is a well-known cause of vascular degeneration and atherosclerosis. Combined with
the pulmonary tumor invasion, the prolonged hypertension of this patient might cause the weakening of the aortic wall, and increase the
incidence of pseudoaneurysm formation. Thus, this aortic arch pseudoaneurysm lesion under high pressure requires urgent intervention to
prevent life-threatening hemoptysis. The pseudoaneurysm is associated with a high mortality rate of 61% with nonsurgical treatment, owing to
documented rupture. Conventional open surgery for pseudoaneurysm remains a surgical challenge because it is associated with a high rate of
mortality (7–17%) and neurological complications (4–12%). In this case, we applied endovascular stent-grafting, which was a minimally
invasive treatment, for thoracic aortic disease. Endovascular procedures have been more commonly used for the treatment of aortic arch
pseudoaneurysm recently. Compared with conventional open surgery, endovascular stent-grafting is less invasive, without any dissection, and
having less bleeding and a shorter procedural time and length of hospital stay. However, long-term clinical efficacy and safety of this
operation have not been confirmed yet. Therefore, the long-term outcome of this procedure needs to be observed in future research.
Pseudoaneurysm can present as hemoptysis, chest pain, and shortness of breath. In this case, hemoptysis was caused by bleeding of the aortic
arch pseudoaneurysm, which results from erosion by pulmonary cancer. It is worth noting that the patient maintained stable vital signs from
the start of the hemoptysis to the operation, during which time he was bleeding from the arterial pseudoaneurysm for more than 15 hours.
This may be due to a relative slow rate of pseudoaneurysm leaking or bleeding effectively hindered by the pulmonary cancer tissue near the
rupture. This dense tissue adhesion possibly results from intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) expression from invasive lung tumors.
Unfortunately, our case with end-stage cancer did not meet the indications for tumor resection; thus, we could not get the large tumor
sample to analyze and verify the expression of these intercellular adhesion molecules. This still needs to be elucidated with further
research. To our knowledge, this is a rare report of an aortic arch pseudoaneurysm as a complication of pulmonary cancer. Although the
detailed mechanism causing aortic arch pseudoaneurysm from pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma remains unclear, and the prognosis value after
successful endovascular stent-grafting still needs to be evaluated under long-term monitoring, aortic arch pseudoaneurysm could be
recognized as a severe complication of pulmonary tumors adjacent to the aortic artery. Abbreviations: 3-D = three-dimensional, BE = base
excess, CRP = C-reactive protein, CT = computed tomography, CTA = computed tomography angiography, EICU = emergency intensive care unit, HGB
= hemoglobin, ICAM-1 = intercellular adhesion molecule-1, LSA = left subclavian artery, MAP = mean artery pressure, MPAP = mean pulmonary
artery pressure, NT-proBNP = N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide, PaCO2 = partial pressure of carbon dioxide, PaO2 = partial pressure of
oxygen, PCT = procalcitonin, PET = positron emission tomography, WBC = white blood cell. Y-QL and FY contributed equally to this work. The
authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
