Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma is rare, accounting for <1 % of all central nervous system (CNS) neoplasms. Angiomatous pleomorphic
xanthoastrocytoma is an extremely rare variant of pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma, with only six cases reported thus far. A 24-year-old
Chinese female patient who presented with seizure and loss of consciousness for 15 min underwent computed tomography and magnetic resonance
imaging, which revealed a mass in the left parietal lobe. Histologically, the tumor was characterized by pleomorphic tumor cells and
prominent vascularity. The angiomatous region varied, ranging from a sinusoidal pattern to a venous malformation. Focal fibrinoid necrosis,
hyalinization, and a moderate infiltration by lymphocytes and plasma cells were visible in the vessel wall. The tumor cells were in close
proximity with adjacent small vessels. Capillaries adjacent to or extending between tumor cells were focally observed. Most tumor cells were
positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein and oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor 2. The Ki-67 index was low. Based on the
patient’s history, clinical data, and pathological findings, she was diagnosed with angiomatous pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (WHO grade
II). This case serves as a reminder to pathologists of the need to be aware of this rare variant of pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma to avoid a
misdiagnosis of this indolent CNS tumor and therefore inappropriate treatment. Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA) is an uncommon tumor of
the central nervous system (CNS). It was first described as a unique entity in 1979 . PXA typically develops in children and young adults,
with no predilection for males vs. females. It usually develops in the superficial cortex, especially in the temporal lobes, and meningeal
involvement is common [2, 3]. Uncommon sites of PXA include the cerebellum [4, 5], ventricle [6, 7], spinal cord [8, 9], sella , retina [9,
11] and pineal gland . Patients usually present with a prolonged history of seizure. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) reveal either a cystic mass with an enhancing mural nodule or a solid mass. Histologically, PXA is characterized by bizarre cytologic
features and “lipidized” tumor cells with a foamy, lipid-laden cytoplasm. These cells are seen in approximately 25 % of cases. However, most
PXAs are composed of spindle-shaped cells with astrocytic features in storiform or fascicular array admixed with tumor giant cells that
display worrisome, often severe, nuclear abnormalities. Intranuclear inclusions, eosinophilic granular bodies (EGB), and perivascular
lymphocytes are often present. In general, these tumors have a very low mitotic rate and microvascular proliferation or necrosis is rare.
Thus, histologically, most PXAs are WHO grade II. On occasion, however, a PXA will have a high mitotic rate (>5 mitoses per 10 high-power
fields) and areas of necrosis, which together are features of anaplastic astrocytoma. These tumors, designated anaplastic PXA, WHO grade III
instead of “PXA with anaplastic features”, have been added to the 2016 CNS WHO as a distinct entity. Compared with PXA (WHO grade II),
anaplastic PXA (WHO grade III) is associated with an aggressive behavior and the survival of affected patients is poor . Variant forms in
which PXA exhibits a mixed histologic pattern have been described and include “composite” tumors, harboring gangliogliomatous and
xanthoastrocytomatous components, and PXAs with uncommon histological features, such as a cohesive, nesting, or alveolar growth pattern , a
hyalinizing, angiomatous pattern , or a melanotic pigmentation [18, 19]. The unusual histological appearance of PXA can complicate its
diagnosis. Moreover, these tumors may be misdiagnosed if the pathologist is not familiar with the full spectrum of their variations. To
improve clinical and pathological knowledge of these tumors, we present a new case of angiomatous pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma and provide
a review of previously published cases. A 24-year-old female was admitted to our hospital. One week earlier, she had suffered a seizure that
had caused a loss of consciousness lasting 15 min. She did not have headache, vomiting, visual disturbance, or hypoacusis. Her family
history was not remarkable. Neurological examination revealed no abnormalities. Contrast-enhanced CT (Fig. 1a) and post-contrast T1-weighted
MRI (Fig. 1b) showed a hyperintense oval mass in the left parietal lobe. Its largest dimension was 1.4 cm. T1-weighted (Fig. 1c), post-
contrast T1-weighted (Fig. 1d), T2-weighted (Fig. 1f), and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (Fig. 1e) MRI showed a well-
circumscribed, partially cystic mass with a focally enhancing mural nodule, minimal surrounding edema, and a mass effect in the left
parietal lobe. Neuroendoscopic excision performed through a parietal hole revealed a lesion with cystic and solid components and a red-meat
color in the left parietal lobe. The mass was well demarcated and adhered slightly to the surrounding normal tissue. A tumor
1.9 × 2 × 2.1 cm in size was completely resected. After 10 months of follow-up, the patient was alive with no tumor recurrence or metastasis
and good seizure control.Fig. 1Imaging examination results. a Contrast-enhanced CT reveals a hyperintense oval mass in the left parietal
lobe. Post-contrast T1-weighted MRI (b coronal view), T1-weighted MRI (c horizontal view), post-contrast T1-weighted MRI (d horizontal
view), T2-weighted MRI (e horizontal view), and FLAIR (f horizontal view) show a well-circumscribed, partially cystic mass with a focally
enhancing mural nodule and minimal surrounding edema (both indicated by arrows) as well as a mass effect in the left parietal lobe Imaging
examination results. a Contrast-enhanced CT reveals a hyperintense oval mass in the left parietal lobe. Post-contrast T1-weighted MRI (b
coronal view), T1-weighted MRI (c horizontal view), post-contrast T1-weighted MRI (d horizontal view), T2-weighted MRI (e horizontal view),
and FLAIR (f horizontal view) show a well-circumscribed, partially cystic mass with a focally enhancing mural nodule and minimal surrounding
edema (both indicated by arrows) as well as a mass effect in the left parietal lobe The tumor tissues were fixed in 10 % formalin and
embedded in paraffin. Sections (4 μm) were cut from each paraffin block; one was stained with H&E and the others were used in
immunohistochemistry (IHC) analyses. IHC staining was performed using the streptavidin-peroxidase system (Ultrasensitive; Mai Xin Inc.,
Fuzhou, China), according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and commercially available prediluted monoclonal antibodies against the
following antigens: epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), pan-cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), vimentin, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP),
oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor 2 (olig2), NeuN, synaptophysin, isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1), CD31, CD34, S100,
neurofilament protein (NF), p53, CD68, inhibin-α, D2-40, and Ki-67. For the negative controls, the primary antibody was replaced with PBS.
The CFDA-approved human BRAFV600E ARMSPCR kit (Amoy Diagnostics Co. Ltd., Xiamen, China) was used to detect the BRAFV600E mutation. The
quality of the extracted DNA was confirmed based on amplifications of a housekeeping gene and its analysis in the kit’s HEX channel, as
recommended by the manufacturer. The amplification protocol consisted of 47 cycles (one cycle of 95 °C for 5 min; 15 cycles of 95 °C for
25 s, 64 °C for 20 s, and 72 °C for 20 s; and 31 cycles of 93 °C for 25 s, 60 °C for 35 s, and 72 °C for 20 s). FAM and HEX signals were
collected during the third stage. The run files were analyzed and interpreted as specified by the manufacturer. Histologically, the tumor
was characterized by markedly pleomorphic tumor cells and a highly vascular configuration. At low magnification, the entire neoplasm was
invested with an abundant vascular meshwork characterized by a sinusoidal configuration and venous malformation (Fig. 2a–d). The neoplastic
astrocytes that composed the tumor were surrounded by a poorly canalized configuration (Fig. 2e, f). Foci of abnormal veins of varying sizes
were present within the tumor (Fig. 2g, h). The walls of these blood vessels were of variable thickness; some were thickened and showed
hyaline degeneration (Fig. 2g); others were large, thin-walled vessels with irregular lumens (Fig. 2h). There was evidence of both acute and
chronic hemorrhage, with foci of hemosiderin (Fig. 2i). Other features of the vessel walls were focal fibrinoid necrosis, hyalinization, and
a moderate infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells (Fig. 2j). The presence of fibrosis or a desmoplastic reaction suggested the
secondary organization of plasma proteins that had exuded through the leaky walls of the newly formed blood vessels (Fig. 2k). Together,
these features suggested a hemangioma. However, the sections showed the pleomorphic histology of the tumor, with a varying cell density
that, at high magnification, consisted mainly of cells with significant nuclear and cellular pleomorphism (Fig. 2l). The spindle-shaped
cells, arranged in fascicular and fibrillary patterns, occurred focally (Fig. 3a). Foci of calcification (Fig. 3b) and microcystic formation
(Fig. 3c) were also seen among the tumor cells, which were in close proximity with the adjacent small blood vessels. Capillaries adjacent to
or protruding into the tumor cell cytoplasm were detected focally (Fig. 3d), together with mono- or multinucleated astrocytes with a foamy
or vacuolated cytoplasm (Fig. 3e–g); however, typical giant xanthoastrocytes were not observed in this case. Focal clusters of small
lymphocytes with intranuclear inclusions (Fig. 3h) were also evident. EGB (intensely eosinophilic or pale) and eosinophilic hyaline droplets
were also observed among the tumor cells (Fig. 3i–k). Despite the focal marked pleomorphism, pseudo-palisading necrosis was not present.
Mitoses were < 1 per 10 high-power field (Fig. 3l), but atypical mitoses were absent. Silver staining revealed reticulin fibers encircling
the blood vessels, but they were rare among the tumor cells (Fig. 4a). The EGBs stained red with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain
(Fig. 4b).Fig. 2Histological features of angiomatous pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma. a–d The entire neoplasm is invested with an abundant
vascular meshwork consisting of a sinusoidal configuration and venous malformation. e, f The tumor is composed of neoplastic astrocytes
surrounded by a poorly canalized configuration. g, h Foci of abnormal veins of varying size are observed within the tumor. The blood vessel
walls are of variable thickness and some show hyaline degeneration; others are large, thin-walled vessels with irregular lumens. i Foci of
hemosiderin are present within the tumor. j Focal fibrinoid necrosis, hyalinization, and a moderate infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma
cells are observed in the vessel wall. k A desmoplastic reaction caused by plasma proteins that have exuded through the leaky walls of newly
formed blood vessels. l The pleomorphic histology of the tumors includes a varying cell density mainly consisting of cells with significant
nuclear and cellular pleomorphism. The corresponding histological features are indicated by arrowsFig. 3Histological features of angiomatous
pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma. a Spindle-shaped cells, arranged in fascicular and fibrillary patterns, are observed in focal areas. b, c
Calcification and microcystic formation are present among the tumor cells. d In some areas, the small vessels and neoplastic astrocytes are
in close proximity to each other, with capillaries adjacent to or extending between the tumor cells. e–g The cells include mono- or
multinucleated giant astrocytes with a foamy or vacuolated cytoplasm. h Focal clusters of small lymphocytes and intranuclear inclusions are
also evident. i–k EGB (intensely eosinophilic or pale) and eosinophilic hyaline droplets between tumor cells. l Less than one mitosis per
high-power field. In each figure part, the corresponding histological features are indicated by arrowsFig. 4Immunohistochemical and specific
staining, and BRAFV600E mutation analysis. a Silver staining shows reticulin fibers encircling the blood vessels, but they are hardly
present among tumor cells. b The EGBs stain red with PAS (Fig. 4b). c–f The tumor cells are diffusely positive for GFAP, S100, and olig2,
but negative for EMA. g, h The tumor cells are negative but the capillaries within the tumor are positive for CD34. i The tumor cells are
negative for IDH1. j Approximately 50 % of the tumor cell nuclei stain positively for p53. k The Ki-67 labeling index is approximately 2 %.
l The tumor was negative for a BRAFV600E mutation. In each figure part, the corresponding histological features are indicated by arrows
Histological features of angiomatous pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma. a–d The entire neoplasm is invested with an abundant vascular meshwork
consisting of a sinusoidal configuration and venous malformation. e, f The tumor is composed of neoplastic astrocytes surrounded by a poorly
canalized configuration. g, h Foci of abnormal veins of varying size are observed within the tumor. The blood vessel walls are of variable
thickness and some show hyaline degeneration; others are large, thin-walled vessels with irregular lumens. i Foci of hemosiderin are present
within the tumor. j Focal fibrinoid necrosis, hyalinization, and a moderate infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells are observed in the
vessel wall. k A desmoplastic reaction caused by plasma proteins that have exuded through the leaky walls of newly formed blood vessels. l
The pleomorphic histology of the tumors includes a varying cell density mainly consisting of cells with significant nuclear and cellular
pleomorphism. The corresponding histological features are indicated by arrows Histological features of angiomatous pleomorphic
xanthoastrocytoma. a Spindle-shaped cells, arranged in fascicular and fibrillary patterns, are observed in focal areas. b, c Calcification
and microcystic formation are present among the tumor cells. d In some areas, the small vessels and neoplastic astrocytes are in close
proximity to each other, with capillaries adjacent to or extending between the tumor cells. e–g The cells include mono- or multinucleated
giant astrocytes with a foamy or vacuolated cytoplasm. h Focal clusters of small lymphocytes and intranuclear inclusions are also evident.
i–k EGB (intensely eosinophilic or pale) and eosinophilic hyaline droplets between tumor cells. l Less than one mitosis per high-power
field. In each figure part, the corresponding histological features are indicated by arrows Immunohistochemical and specific staining, and
BRAFV600E mutation analysis. a Silver staining shows reticulin fibers encircling the blood vessels, but they are hardly present among tumor
cells. b The EGBs stain red with PAS (Fig. 4b). c–f The tumor cells are diffusely positive for GFAP, S100, and olig2, but negative for EMA.
g, h The tumor cells are negative but the capillaries within the tumor are positive for CD34. i The tumor cells are negative for IDH1. j
Approximately 50 % of the tumor cell nuclei stain positively for p53. k The Ki-67 labeling index is approximately 2 %. l The tumor was
negative for a BRAFV600E mutation. In each figure part, the corresponding histological features are indicated by arrows
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were diffusely positive for GFAP (Fig. 4c), S100 (Fig. 4d), olig2 (Fig. 4e), synaptophysin, and
vimentin, but negative for EMA (Fig. 4f), CD31, CD34 (Fig. 4g, h), NeuN, inhibin-α, D2-40, and IDH1 (Fig. 4i). Some areas of the tumor
stained positively for NF. Although the foamy macrophages around the tumor cells stained positively for CD68, the tumor cells were
completely negative. Positive nuclear staining for p53 was detected in ~50 % of the tumor cells (Fig. 4j). The Ki-67 labeling index was
approximately 2 % (Fig. 4k). Two recent studies, including in pediatric and in adult patients, suggested a relationship of PXA to the
BRAFV600E mutation. However, the mutation was not detected in our patient (Fig. 4l). Angiomatous PXA was first described by Sugita et al. in
1990 . To date, the five reports in the English-language literatures describe six cases [17, 20–23]. Our patient represents the seventh
case. Given the rarity of PXA, we discuss this case in the context of a literature review of the previously reported cases. The clinical and
follow-up data of these cases and of the current one are summarized in Table 1. Most patients with PXA have a history of epileptic seizures.
None of the patients experienced tumor recurrence or metastasis during the follow-up period.Table 1Clinical data of reported angiomatous
PXACaseAuthorsA/GTumor locationImage findsSymptomsFollow-up1Sugita et al. 1990 19/FNDND1-year history of epileptic seizures10 years,
NOR2Sugita et al. 1990 26/MNDND6-month history of epileptic seizuresND3Takahabashi et al. 1995 58/FNDND30-year history of epileptic
seizures2 years, NOR4Lee et al. 1996 45/Mleft temporo-occipital lobecystic massa 15-year history of generalized tonic-clonic
seizuresND5Sugita et al. 1999 43/Mright temporal lobecystic-solid massa 20-year history of generalized epileptic seizuresone year,
NOR6Richard et al. 1999 27/Mright medial frontal lobecystic-solid mass3-year history of intermittent, transient, mild, left-sided
weakness1 year, NOR7Present case24/Fleft parietal lobecystic-solid mass1-week history of epileptic seizures10 months, NORA/G, Age/gender; F,
female; M, male; ND, no data; NOR, no evidence of recurrence Clinical data of reported angiomatous PXA A/G, Age/gender; F, female; M, male;
ND, no data; NOR, no evidence of recurrence The histological features of angiomatous PXA are the presence of an abundant vasculature. In our
patient, the blood vessel walls were of variable thickness and some showed hyaline thickening. The abundance of blood vessels in some areas
was such that the tumor resembled a hemangioma. Other features were neoplastic astrocytes and tiny blood vessels in close proximity to each
other, and histological features consistent with the original description of angiomatous PXA. However, some areas of the tumor consisted of
epithelioid tumor cells arranged trabecularly and surrounded by sinusoidal configurations (Fig. 2b, e, f). These sinusoidal channels were
not lined by endothelial cells and were filled with erythrocytes (Fig. 2e, f). Previous reports of angiomatous PXA did not include a
description of this histological pattern, which is, however, seen in other variants of PXA such as epithelioid PXA . In our patient, in some
areas of the tumor these two histological patterns blended imperceptibly, demonstrating the potential overlap of these two histological
types in the same tumor. The histological features of the seven known cases of angiomatous PXA are summarized in Table 2. As suggested by
the name of this variant, its highly vascular configuration mimics the pattern seen in highly vascularized or “angiomatous” meningiomas and
is a common histological feature. Although the typical giant xanthomatous tumor cells were not observed in the tumor specimen from our
patient, the detection of prominent multinucleated tumor cells, foci of tumor cells with a foamy or vacuolated cytoplasm, giant cells, and
EGB together supported a diagnosis of PXA. Degenerative changes, such as granular bodies, microcystic changes, hyaline droplets, hyalinized
blood vessel walls, hemosiderin deposition, and calcification, seen in the other six cases of PXA, were also present in the tumor of our
patient. The degeneration characteristics of these tumors might be related to the indolent course of angiomatous PXA, as there has been no
recurrence in any of the previously described patients.Table 2The histological features of angiomatous PXAHistological featuresSugita et al.
1990 Takahabashi et al. 1995 Lee et al. 1996 Sugita et al. 1999 Richard et al. 1999 Present caseCase 1Case 2Case 3Case 4Case 5Case 6Case
7Highly vascular configuration+++++++Microcystic formationNDNDNDND+ND+, focalstoriform or fascicular growth pattern with spindled
cellsNDND+ND++, focalAnaplasic featuresNDNDND----“Epithelioid” cellsNDNDND--ND+Pleomorphism+++ND+++Foamy or vacuolated cytoplasm+++++++Giant
cells+++ND+++Xanthomatous tumor cells++NDND++-Dysplastic neurons+++ND++-Intranuclear
inclusionsNDNDNDNDNDND+CalcificationNDNDNDND+++Rosenthal fibersNDNDNDNDND+-Eosinophilic hyaline dropletsNDNDNDNDND++Granular
bodieseosinophilic+++++++PaleNDNDNDNDNDND+Hemosiderin depositionNDNDND+-++, focalPerivascular lymphocytes infiltration++ND++++Reticulin
networkNDNDND+---MitosesrarerarerarerarerarerarerareNecrosis-------Endothelial proliferation-------+: the corresponding feature exists; −:
the corresponding feature does not exist; ND: no data The histological features of angiomatous PXA +: the corresponding feature exists; −:
the corresponding feature does not exist; ND: no data The histological features of these tumors suggest their correlation with vascular
malformation. However, whether these vascular changes represent a chronic clinical course or tumor degeneration, thus predicting a
relatively favorable biological behavior of the PXA, is unclear. In the case presented by Sugita et al., obvious calcification of the
vascular walls and extensive fibrosis were features of the tumor . Lee et al. reported numerous hemosiderin-laden macrophages in their PXA
specimen . The histological features of the tumors in our case were similar to those reported by Sugita and Lee, but there were fewer
hemosiderin-laden macrophages and calcification did not involve the vascular walls, nor was it as extensive. These discrepancies suggest the
slower growth of the tumors in the cases reported by those authors, as both patients had a long history of epileptic seizures.
Immunohistologically, the tumor cells in all seven angiomatous PXAs reported thus far consistently expressed GFAP, S100, and olig2. However,
CD34 and NF expression is not a constant feature and only roughly half of the tumor cell nuclei stained positively for p53. Although the
overexpression of p53 in glioma indicates a poor prognosis, the relevance of p53 in PXA remains to be clarified. In a molecular analysis of
PXA by Tabouret et al. , a BRAFV600E mutation was a common molecular characteristic. An association between BRAF-mutated PXA, reticulin
fiber deposition, and CD34 expression was also described , while in our case, neither reticulin fiber deposition (Fig. 4a) nor CD34
expression (Fig. 4g, h) was observed, which precisely demonstrates this phenomenon from reverse. In the case reported by Yamada et al. , the
tumor harbored both a BRAFV600E mutation and an IDH1 R132H mutation, although the latter has been seldom identified in PXA. In our patient,
BRAFV600E mutation analysis and IDH1 R132H immunohistological staining yielded negative results (Fig. 4l, i). Because of the prominent
nuclear pleomorphism (Fig. 3e, f, g) and mesenchymal-like foci (Fig. 3a) in the tumor removed from our patient, the differential diagnosis
will include giant-cell glioblastoma, gliosarcoma, ganglioglioma, and pilocytic astrocytoma. Unlike PXA, giant-cell glioblastoma and
gliosarcoma typically have significant mitotic activity, microvascular proliferation, and pseudo-palisading necrosis. Neither significant
mitotic activity nor pseudo-palisading necrosis were seen in the present case, and the Ki-67 labeling index was ~2 %, which ruled out a
diagnosis of giant-cell glioblastoma or gliosarcoma. Despite the abundant vasculature, glomeruloid microvascular proliferation,
characteristic of glioblastoma, was not seen in this case. In addition, EGBs were prominent and are typical of PXA, but not gliosarcoma. The
cystic mass with a focally enhancing mural nodule, revealed by MRI, also supports a diagnosis of PXA rather than gliosarcoma. PXA and
ganglioglioma may have overlapping clinical, radiologic, and histologic features and in rare cases the two co-exist, forming a composite
neoplasm. However, ganglioglioma is less pleomorphic, has a more obvious neuronal component, and lacks lipidized astrocytes. In our patient,
the presence in the tumor of neoplastic astrocytes with a foamy or vacuolated cytoplasm and the negative immunostaining result for NeuN did
not support a diagnosis of ganglioglioma. The tumor cells in pilocytic astrocytoma may have bizarre, atypical, or pleomorphic nuclei but
their typical biphasic pattern, consisting of bipolar and loose-textured multipolar cells, was not identified in this case. In addition,
angiomatous PXA should be distinguished with hemangioblastoma based on the abundant vasculature and the tumor cells with foamy or vacuolated
cytoplasm. However, in hemangioblastoma, the stromal cells often label for S-100, NSE, CD56, inhibin-α, and D2-40. Reactivity for GFAP, if
present, is usually limited to entrapped astrocytes, thus seldom presents with diffuse form. In the current case, the immunophenotype
(diffusely positive for olig2 and GFAP, inhibin-α-, D2-40-) ruled out a diagnosis of hemangioblastoma. In general, PXA has a relatively
indolent clinical course. However, Kepes et al. reported several instances in which local recurrences that developed at varying intervals
after surgery transitioned to a more malignant type of astrocytoma (anaplastic astrocytoma or glioblastoma). Weldon-Linne et al. also
reported that PXA may have a less favorable course, with aggressive, malignant transformation even after a prolonged period of indolence.
While malignant evolution is the exception, its occasional occurrence warns against considering PXA as benign. Tabouret et al. found that
the BRAFV600E mutation was a common molecular characteristic of PXA and suggested its predictive value for progression-free survival in
adult patients. However, p53 overexpression rather than a BRAFV600E mutation was detected in the tumor from our patient. Whether their
absence indicated a relatively unfavorable biological behavior remains to be determined in the long-term follow-up of our patient. Our case
report of angiomatous pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma is meant to serve as a reminder to pathologists to be aware of this rare variant of PXA.
The description provided herein and the review of the features of these tumors, based on previously published cases, should help to avoid a
misdiagnosis of this typically indolent CNS tumor. CNS, central nervous system; CT, computed tomography; EGB, eosinophilic granular bodies;
EMA, epithelial membrane antigen; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; IDH1, Isocitrate dehydrogenase 1; IHC, immunohistochemistry; MRI,
magnetic resonance imaging; NF, neurofilament; olig2, oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor 2; PXA, Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma We
thank the patient, who requested anonymity, for agreeing to our report and for providing a detailed medical history. This study was
supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81302312 to Yang Liu and no. 81302192 to Liang Wang), the
Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province (No. L2013292 to Yang Liu), and the Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas
Chinese Scholars (No. 2013277 to Yang Liu). The datasets supporting the conclusions of this article are included within the article. YL
analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript as a major contributor. YL, YJ, YW, and HC performed the immunochemical staining. LW, HX, QL, XQ,
and EW revised the discussion section of this manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Ethical approval for this
study was obtained from the Local Trials Committee of the China Medical University.
