Double duct sign where there is a simultaneous dilatation of both the common bile duct (CBD) and pancreatic duct is usually associated with
sinister causes like malignancies of pancreatic head or ampulla. Occasionally, benign causes like chronic pancreatitis or sphincter of Oddi
dysfunction (SOD) may cause double duct sign. Chronic opium abuse is a rare cause of the double duct sign, and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)
findings of this rare entity have been occasionally reported. We report about a 54-year-old male with a history of chronic alcohol and
opioid abuse evaluated for episodes of abdominal pain and found to have opioid-related SOD and improved with biliary sphincterotomy. EUS was
done to rule out malignancy and revealed hypoechoic prominence around terminal CBD suggestive of hypertrophied muscle. The double duct sign
is a simultaneous dilatation of both the pancreatic duct (PD) and the common bile duct (CBD) and is usually a result of narrowing of
terminal parts of both the ducts due to various causes including encasement of the CBD and main PD by a pancreatic head tumour, ampullary
carcinoma, pancreatitis and periampullary stenosis. Uncommon reported causes include lymphoma, metastasis, Kaposi sarcoma, and
retroperitoneal fibrosis. We report a 54-year-old male who came with abdominal pain and was found to have an unusual etiology of double duct
sign. A 54-year-old man presented to us with right upper abdominal pain of 4 months duration. The pain was episodic, severe and used to last
around Â½ h and occurred in relation to meals. There was no associated vomiting, jaundice, fever, loss of weight or appetite. His physical
examination was non-contributory. He had a history of chronic alcohol abuse as well as oral opium ingestion for last 25 years. He used to
daily consume oral powdered form of opium husk (vernacular Bhukki). His hemogram, kidney function tests and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
were normal. Blood tests revealed a serum bilirubin of 1.0 mg/dL (Normal, 0.2-1.4 mg/dL), aspartate aminotransferase of 47 U/L (Normal 1-35
U/L), alanine aminotransferase of 41 U/L (Normal, 1-35 U/L) and alkaline phosphatase 156 U/L (Normal, 20-128 U/L). Abdominal ultrasound
revealed a dilated anechoic CBD with mild central intra-hepatic biliary radical dilatation and dilated PD. Contrast enhanced computed
tomography of the abdomen showed a double duct sign with CBD dilated until lower end and a dilated PD [Figure 1]. Side viewing endoscopy
revealed a prominent papilla [Figure 2]. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) using a linear echoendoscope (GF-UCT 180 linear echoendoscope, Olympus
Corp, Tokyo) revealed simultaneous dilatation of the CBD and PD (double duct sign) with anechoic lumens of both the ducts. The ampullary
region revealed a prominent hypoechoic layer suggestive of muscular hypertrophy [Figure 3]. The pancreatic parenchyma was normal. A
diagnosis of opium-induced sphincter of Oddi dysfunction (SOD) was made, and patient underwent biliary sphincterotomy with improvement in
his symptoms and normalization of his liver enzymes. The ampullary biopsy was inconclusive. Post sphincterotomy spy glass cholangioscopy
(Boston Scientific Corp, Natick, Mass) was also done for evaluation of the bile duct mucosa at the terminal end and it revealed normal
mucosa [Figure 4]. He was referred for de-addiction and was asymptomatic after 3 months follow-up. Abdominal computed tomography showing
dilated common bile duct (arrow) Side viewing endoscopy revealing a bulky papilla Endoscopic ultrasound showing dilated common bile duct and
pancreatic duct with hypoechoic prominence at lower end (arrow) Spy glass done for evaluation of common bile duct. The papilla wide opened
by biliary sphincterotomy Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction is a benign, non-calculous obstruction at the major duodenal papilla that can
produce variable clinical symptoms including pancreaticobiliary pain, cholestasis, and/or pancreatitis. Opiates produce multiple
pharmacologic effects in the gastrointestinal tract with constipation being the most common. It has also been shown to increase the
contraction of sphincter of Oddi. It can increase the sphincter tonicity and result in SOD. Constant prolonged use of this drug might be
responsible for the contraction and permanent dysfunction of the sphincter of Oddi and SOD due to chronic opium use is now recognized as a
distinct clinical entity. Clinical features of this entity are variable and may consist of anorexia, weight loss, constipation and abdominal
tenderness. The endoscopic visualization of the second part of the duodenum may reveal a prominent papilla, but even ulcerative and
tumourous changes are common in opium related SOD and therefore it is important to carefully exclude the malignancy. EUS is an important
investigation for excluding the malignancy as even small lesions in the ampullary area can be detected by a carefully performed EUS. EUS can
also help in the detection of hypertrophy of the muscular sphincter of Oddi as was seen in the index case. The response to biliary
sphincterotomy in such cases is excellent as was in the present case. The case is reported because opium abuse is an uncommon cause of SOD
and the history of opium abuse must be sought in patients with unexplained biliary dilatation or dual duct dilatation and residing in areas
where opium abuse is common. Furthermore, EUS provides an excellent modality to rule out small malignant lesions resulting in double duct
sign. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
