Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 31 Final Diagnosis: Intraparenchymal pseudo-aneurysms in kidney transplant
Symptoms: Asymptomatic Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Percutaneous renal biopsy Specialty: Transplantology Diagnostic/therapeutic
accidents Percutaneous needle biopsy is routinely performed for renal allograft management. Vascular complications of the procedure include
pseudoaneurysm and arterio-venous fistulae formation. Delayed diagnosis of these complications is due to their mostly asymptomatic and
indolent nature. We present a case of extensive intraparenchymal pseudoaneurysm formation within the inferior pole of the allograft,
diagnosed two years following the most recent biopsy procedure. Renal pseudoaneurysms may only be diagnosed years after their formation as
they are typically asymptomatic. Percutaneous needle biopsy is an integral part of renal allograft transplant management . This minimally
invasive procedure is commonly performed in transplant recipients when rejection is suspected . This simple, useful procedure does, however,
have risks; arterio-venous fistulae and pseudoaneurysm formation, or both, comprise the common vascular complications . Imaging provides
essential diagnostic value in the presence of such complications . Renal pseudoaneurysms are usually evaluated with duplex ultrasound and
computed tomography for diagnostic confirmation and intervention planning . On angiography, a pseudoaneurysm appears as a spherical
extravascular collection of contrast material that opacifies during the arterial phase and often persists into the late venous phase . Renal
pseudoaneurysms are caused by hemorrhage secondary to destruction of the arterial wall from the biopsy needle trauma. Subsequently, in the
course of the repair processes of the perivascular tissues, the exsanguinated blood is liquefied and dissolved, leaving a sac continuous
with the endoluminal space . We present the case of a 31-year-old African male patient with end-stage renal disease secondary to
hypertension. Post-cadaveric renal transplant was performed in June 2012. The graft was implanted in the right iliac fossa. An initial
transplant protocol biopsy targeting the inferior renal pole was performed in October 2012 using a 14F Tru-Cut biopsy needle. Histology of
the specimen indicated the presence of two medium-sized arteries and one large artery and no features of immunological rejection. A second,
one-year post-transplant protocol biopsy was performed in August 2013. No early rejection was reported. During the first half of 2015, the
patient’s creatinine levels began to increase, and he was investigated for possible allograft rejection. During planning for a renal biopsy,
a pulsatile abdominal mass over the right iliac fossa with associated bruit was detected. A graft renal aneurysm was suspected clinically,
and a computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the abdomen was performed. CT angiography confirmed the presence of multiple, single-lobed,
intraparenchymal, segmental renal artery pseudoaneurysms. The largest pseudoaneurysm diameter measured 2.53 cm (Figure 1). The
pseudoaneurysms were exclusively located within the inferior pole and pelvis of the allograft, while the superior renal pole had normal
intraparenchymal arteries. There were no features of renal infarct. The allograft renal artery anastomosis with the right external iliac was
normal. There was no aneurysmal dilatation or stenosis at this level (Figure 2). The extrarenal renal artery and iliac arteries were
unaffected. There was no active extravasation of contrast to suggest aneurysmal rupture or leak. There was no hydronephrosis or features of
ureteric obstruction in the allograft collecting system. The native kidneys were atrophic bilaterally in keeping with end-stage hypertensive
renal disease. The native renal arteries and their major branches opacified normally and were devoid of aneurysmal dilatation. There were no
mural plaques of the aorta or its major branches to suggest early atherosclerotic changes. In an effort to prevent possible pseudoaneurysm
rupture or leak, selective endovascular stenting of the affected renal artery branches was attempted following the CT diagnosis of the
pseudoaneurysms. The presence of large pseudoaneurysms was the indication for the intervention. Due to the multiplicity of the
pseudoaneurysms and endovascular technical factors, not all the arterial branches could be targeted for stenting – providing only partial
rupture protection. This intervention was believed to act as a temporary measure prior to definitive allograft nephrectomy and
retransplantation. The pseudoaneurysm formation is a likely complication of percutaneous needle biopsy because of the predominance of the
pseudoaneurysms within the inferior renal pole, the targeted biopsy site, and the unaffected superior pole. lntrarenal arterio-venous
fistulae and pseudoaneurysms are almost exclusively the result of arterial trauma induced during percutaneous needle biopsy, although
infectious etiologies have been described . Pseudoaneurysms may be intrarenal or extrarenal . Extrarenal pseudoaneurysms are rare and often
have a worse prognosis, complicating fewer than 0.1% of renal transplants, and may be associated with technically difficult surgeries, post-
transplant infections, and chronic rejection . Vascular complications are reported to occur in 10% of renal transplant patients and are the
most common cause of allograft dysfunction in cadaveric kidney transplantation . The rate of vascular complications following percutaneous
core biopsies in both native and transplanted kidneys ranges from 0.9% to 15% . This wide discrepancy is thought to be secondary to the
benign and asymptomatic course of these lesions; however, pseudoaneurysms may present with pain or pulsatile abdominal mass, as noted
clinically in our case . The possibility of true aneurysms was considered. True intra-abdominal visceral aneurysms are usually a result of
degeneration of the arterial media in the setting of atherosclerotic disease, fibromuscular dysplasia, and collagen vascular disorders, and
up to half are discovered incidentally at imaging. In view the allograft recipient’s age and lack of arterial plaques, intraparenchymal
renal aneurysms were unlikely to have developed from atherosclerotic disease. Fibromusclar dysplasia affecting the donor renal artery was
excluded on the CT angiogram because of the absence of renal artery stenosis and typical “string of beads” appearance. CT angiography is
described as the most specific screening modality for renal artery fibromuscular dysplasia, while intra-arterial angiography is regarded as
the gold standard confirmatory test . Inflammatory and collagen vascular disorders, including Ehlers-Danlos and Williams syndromes and
neurofibromatosis, could not be excluded in the donor allograft; however, they do represent possible differential diagnosis for visceral
aneurysms. Renal and visceral artery stenosis may be in keeping with collagen vascular disorders and may mimic fibromuscular dysplasia .
Genetic studies and phenotypic traits were not available for the cadaver donor. The investigation and diagnosis of aneurysmal disease in our
case occurred 24 months following the most recent biopsy, indicating insidious progression. Nakatani et al. describe a case of arterio-
venous fistula and large pseudoaneurysm diagnosed five years after renal biopsy, illustrating their indolent nature . Clinical suspicion is
essential, as is the need for adequate imaging protocols (fine-slice CT angiography or formal digital subtraction angiography to ensure an
accurate diagnosis is made) . With the expansion of the pseudoaneurysms over time, compression effects may have restricted intrarenal
circulation, causing local ischemia and an element of renal dysfunction as evidenced by elevation of the creatinine level. Allograft
dysfunction may rarely result from extrinsic compression of graft vessels, and urgent intervention may be required in the event of rupture.
Graft failure may result in aneurysm formation, and conversely, the presence of aneurysms may be the etiology of the failure . The vast
majority of small pseudoaneurysms or arteriovenous fistulae are treated conservatively and resolve spontaneously . Intervention is
recommended in instances of symptomatic pseudoaneurysm, aneurysm diameter greater than 2.5 cm, expansion on follow-up, and infectious
etiology . There is a high risk of pseudoaneurysm rupture without treatment and intervention is secondarily beneficial in the setting of
renovascular hypertension, which may be associated with renal pseudoaneurysms. Open surgical management is often associated with graft loss;
moreover, endovascular repair using stent grafts or coil embolization can provide arterial control during surgical repair . Recognition and
repair before rupture have a more favorable outcome . In the presence of severe hemorrhage or infection, stent grafting can be used as a
temporary measure until such time that a controlled transplant nephrectomy can be performed. In the setting of infectious etiology, the
possibility of the stent graft initiating sepsis exists and evaluation of the potential risks is suggested . Other modalities described for
renal transplant pseudoaneurysm management include ultrasound-guided, percutaneous thrombin injection in anatomically suitable cases, the
use of covered kissing stents to repair complex anastomotic pseudoaneurysms, or a combination of thrombin injection followed by stent
placement . Endovascular embolization with the use of coils or gelatin sponge has been described with a greater than 80% success rate in
preventing hemorrhage and rupture while preserving renal parenchyma. Despite the importance of percutaneous needle biopsy in the management
of kidney transplant patients, the risk of iatrogenic pseudoaneurysm formation exists. Aneurysmal pressure effects may result in allograft
dysfunction. Renal pseudoaneurysms may only be diagnosed years after their formation and are usually asymptomatic. Intervention is
recommended where pseudoaneurysms increase in size on follow-up examination or aneurysmal diameter measures more than 2.5 cm. Statement The
authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors declare no funding was received in relation to this case report. Computed tomography
angiogram, coronal reconstruction demonstrating aneurysmal dilatation of intraparenchymal renal artery branches. There is relative sparing
of the superior renal pole arterial branches. Computed tomography angiogram, maximum intensity projection (MIP) image. The arrow indicates
the renal artery anastomosis with the right external iliac artery. Note that there is no aneurysmal dilatation at this level.
