Magnesium has a regulatory role in the excitability of cell membranes, and is also a cofactor in the phosphorylation of thiamine.
Hypomagnesemia has been associated with coronary vasospasm, but its role in cerebrovascular pathology is controversial, and cerebral
vasospasm exclusively attributable to hypomagnesemia has not been reported in humans. We report the case of a 51-year-old man in whom
uncontrollable vomiting, treatment with omeprazole and thiazide, and renal impairment lead to a severe hypomagnesemia (magnesium below the
level of detection in blood tests), which secondarily caused Wernicke’s encephalopathy and vasospasm in multiple cerebral arteries (seen
with cerebral angiography and CT angiography) that presented with a complete right hemisphere neurological deficit. These disturbances
completely resolved when magnesium levels were normalized and subsequent neuroimaging tests confirmed the resolution of angiographic
changes. Our case suggests that hypomagnesemia should be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients with neurological symptoms and
predisposing causes. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12883-016-0660-x) contains supplementary material, which is available
to authorized users. Magnesium is the most abundant intracellular divalent cation and the fourth most abundant element in the body. The
majority of this mineral is localized in the bones and soft tissues, only 1 % resides in the extracellular fluids . Magnesium balance is
maintained by means of intestinal absorption in the small bowel, mostly in the ileum and distal part of jejunum, and renal excretion. The
kidneys are crucial in magnesium homeostasis. 70 % of the magnesium filtered is reabsorbed in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle.
It is estimated that an adult needs an intake of 255–350 mg daily . Conditions that can lead to hypomagnesemia include alcoholism, diabetes,
malabsorption (Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, coeliac disease, short bowel syndrome), gastrointestinal loses (biliary or intestinal
fistula, large-volume diarrhea or vomiting) endocrine causes (hyperaldosteronism, hyperparathyroidism, syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone secretion, hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria), renal disease (renal failure, dialysis, intrinsic tubular disorders) and
medication use (diuretics, proton pump inhibitors, antibiotics, chemotherapeutic agents) . The principal function of magnesium in the human
body is structural, mainly in bones and teeth. However, according to its ionic characteristics, it also plays a role in the regulation of
the excitability of neuromuscular membranes. Magnesium works as a cofactor in many enzymatic reactions such as ATP kinase reactions or the
activation of thiamine by its phosphorylation to thiamine pyrophosphate [1, 2]. Magnesium is also an antagonist of the N-methyl-d-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor [1, 3], and has direct vasodilatory effects due to various mechanisms. Hypomagnesemia is thought to lead to an increase in
vascular smooth muscle tone and reactivity, its association with acute focal vasospasm in coronary arteries has been known for decades ,
albeit cerebral vasospasm exclusively attributable to hypomagnesemia in humans has not been reported. We report a case of vasoconstriction
in multiple cerebral arteries and Wernicke’s encephalopathy (WE) secondary to hypomagnesemia. A 51-year-old man, diagnosed with adjustment
disorder due to work problems, and hypertension without other vascular risk factors, non-smoker, no alcohol or drug consumption, treated
with valsartan/hydrochlorothiazide and omeprazole. He presented with intermittent episodes of incoercible vomiting over a three month
period, and was finally diagnosed with adult cyclic vomiting syndrome after an extensive study that ruled out organic origin (normal blood
tests, stool test, urea breath test, abdominal CT scan and ultrasound, echoendoscopy with biopsies). The patient was admitted to hospital
for prerenal kidney failure after several weeks of uncontrollable vomiting, up to 50 episodes per day. Physical examination was unremarkable
except for intermittent optokinetic nystagmus. Blood tests showed creatinine 4.12 mg/dL, urea 92 mg/dL, creatinine clearance 15 mL/min/S,
albumin 4.6 g/dL, Na 142 mmol/L, K 3.3 mmol/L, Cl 90 mmol/L, Ca 7.6 mg/dL (normal 8.6–10.2), P 4 mg/dL (normal 2.6–4.5). Intravenous
hydration and metoclopramide were started. 24 h later he presented with a sudden and complete right-sided cerebral hemisphere deficit
(National Institute of Health Stroke Scale score of 18), without seizures, fever or other clinical features, and with a blood pressure of
146/93 mmHg. Code Stroke was activated, ECG, brain CT scan and transcranial Doppler were normal and intravenous thrombolysis was decided
upon. There was no improvement after 30 min, and a CT angiography was performed (Fig. 1a–b) showing subtle narrowing of the entire right
circulation, and stenoses in several branches of the right middle cerebral artery, making it impossible to rule out a distal vessel
occlusion. Rescue therapy with mechanical thrombectomy was proposed, but cerebral angiography (Fig. 1c-d) showed several segments with
stenosis without occlusion in multiple arteries of the right carotid circulation, so no therapeutic procedure was finally realized. There
was no improvement after 24 h, and the patient then developed a rapid progressive encephalopathy accompanied by visual hallucinations,
ataxia, multidirectional nystagmus and ophthalmoparesis, symptoms in keeping with WE. Brain MRI was unremarkable (Fig. 1g-h, see also
Additional files 1, 2, 3 and 4), with no ischemic areas or other abnormalities. Further complete blood tests were conducted, and magnesium
levels were found to be below the level of detection (<0.5 mg/dL, normal 1.5–2.5), mild hypocalcaemia (6.6 mg/dL) and hypophosphatemia
(1.9 mg/dL) were also observed. Diuretics, omeprazole and dextrose were stopped, intravenous ondansetron controlled the vomiting, and
aggressive intravenous magnesium replacement, saline and empirical thiamine were commenced, and the patient was admitted to the intensive
care unit to control potential cardiac arrhythmias. Blood tests after 24 h showed almost normal calcium levels (8.5 mg/dL) and a mild
hypomagnesemia persisting (1.3 mg/dL). In subsequent blood tests all ions were always in normal ranges. No cardiac abnormalities were
apparent, and following analytical recovery the patient started to improve and within 48 h the focal symptoms disappeared, and WE was
completely resolved within two weeks. CT angiography carried out 7 days after the beginning of symptom onset (Fig. 1e–f) showed resolution
of the arterial changes. Subsequent studies excluded renal tubular diseases (normal magnesium and other ions in 24–hour urine), endocrine
disorders (PTH and 25-hydroxy vitamin D normal) and in successive neuroimaging controls no new abnormalities were found. The patient remains
neurologically asymptomatic.Fig. 1Vasospasm in cerebral arteries secondary to hypomagnesemia. Coronal (a) and axial (b) CT angiography
showing subtle focal changes in the vascular lumen of the right carotid circulation (a, white arrows) and overall decrease of the
vascularization in the territory of the right middle cerebral artery (b, circled in white). Selective cerebral angiography injecting from
the left internal carotid artery (c), without abnormalities, and from the right internal carotid artery (d), showing overall decrease of the
vascularization, focal narrowing (d, white arrows) and segmental stenosis of several arteries (d, white box). CT angiography carried out
7 days after the previous one (e and f) showing complete resolution of the vascular changes. Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) (g) and fluid
attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR) (h) sequences of brain MRI showing no relevant abnormalities Vasospasm in cerebral arteries secondary
to hypomagnesemia. Coronal (a) and axial (b) CT angiography showing subtle focal changes in the vascular lumen of the right carotid
circulation (a, white arrows) and overall decrease of the vascularization in the territory of the right middle cerebral artery (b, circled
in white). Selective cerebral angiography injecting from the left internal carotid artery (c), without abnormalities, and from the right
internal carotid artery (d), showing overall decrease of the vascularization, focal narrowing (d, white arrows) and segmental stenosis of
several arteries (d, white box). CT angiography carried out 7 days after the previous one (e and f) showing complete resolution of the
vascular changes. Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) (g) and fluid attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR) (h) sequences of brain MRI showing
no relevant abnormalities Acute hypomagnesemia can produce different symptoms depending on the severity of the deficiency. Early signs of
hypomagnesemia are non-specific and include loss of appetite, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, fatigue and weakness. The association with
hypophosphatemia and hypocalcaemia is frequent. Subsequently, lower magnesium levels can result in tremor, muscle cramps, tetany and
generalized seizures . On the other hand, chronic magnesium deficiency is not rare these days, however, it usually remains asymptomatic.
This condition has been associated with anxiety, depression, other psychiatric disorders and dementia . Hypomagnesemia is a known cause of
Wernicke`s encephalopathy, and frequently these cases are refractory to treatment with thiamine, as magnesium is a cofactor in thiamine
phosphorylation, needed for its activation . Our patient developed WE, without an associated Korsakoff syndrome as he did not present with
amnesia. These symptoms were completely reversed after two weeks of supplementation with magnesium and thiamine. As previously mentioned,
magnesium plays a key role in the regulation of the excitability of cell membranes. It antagonizes the NMDA receptor [1, 3] and cell surface
and intracellular voltage-gated calcium channels [3, 5], thereby impeding calcium entry to ischemic neurons, which is crucial for the
activation of cellular apoptotic pathways. Due to these actions, magnesium has been shown to be a neuroprotective agent in different models
of cerebral ischemia, demonstrating improvement of prognosis after a cardiac arrest , in pre-term infant hypoxic-ischemic injury , during
cardiac by-pass surgery and during carotid endarterectomy . Nonetheless, recent trials that evaluated intravenous magnesium versus placebo
in acute stroke have shown no benefit to this treatment, nor remarkable adverse events [10, 11]. According to its cardiovascular functions,
magnesium deficiency has been linked to vascular risk factors such as hypertension, atherosclerosis and diabetes, as well as having a
statistical association with greater risk of coronary heart disease, myocardial infarction, sudden cardiac death and stroke . This ion has
direct vasodilatory effects in the cerebral vasculature by antagonizing endothelin-1, neuropeptide Y and angiotensin II, whilst at the same
time exerting a calcium antagonist effect on vascular smooth muscle [3, 5]. Several trials reported its benefit as a vasodilator agent
improving symptomatic vasospasm and delayed ischemia in aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) [12, 13], and for years it was used
routinely in the treatment of these problems. However, recent trials evaluated the effect of intravenous magnesium for aneurysmal SAH and
showed no benefit in any of their objectives [14, 15]. It is possible that prolonged delay of the administration of magnesium and its
limited passage through the blood–brain barrier after intravenous supplementation [5, 16] have limited its potential benefit. Furthermore,
hypomagnesemia has been previously described as a cause of human coronary [4, 17] and retinal vasospasm, but cerebral vasospasm directly
attributable to hypomagnesemia has previously been proven only in animals models . This may be because cerebral circulation is less
sensitive to variations in magnesium concentrations due to the blood–brain barrier, and mild or moderate hypomagnesemia may have no effect
on the cerebral vasculature. In the case of our patient, massive vomiting, renal impairment and previous treatment with omeprazole and
thiazide lead to a severe hypomagnesemia, which caused secondary vasoconstriction in multiple cerebral arteries, in addition to WE. These
disturbances were resolved when serum magnesium levels were normalized, which further confirms the cause-and-effect relationship. It is also
possible that adult cyclic vomiting syndrome, which has been associated with autonomic vascular changes [20, 21], could have played a role
in the cerebral vasospasm of the patient, albeit previous studies did not report any cerebrovascular event, so it is difficult to establish
a clear association in this case. As to why our patient developed cerebral vasospasm and not vasospasm at other locations remains unknown.
In the same way, we cannot give a feasible explanation for why these changes only occurred in the right hemisphere and not in both. Further
studies in this area are needed to confirm these hypotheses. In conclusion, hypomagnesemia should be considered in the differential
diagnosis of patients with neurological symptoms and predisposing causes for magnesium deficit. To the best of our knowledge, we have not
found any other reported cases of cerebral vasospasm attributable to hypomagnesemia in humans in the literature. This may be an
underdiagnosed condition which should be considered because rapid detection and correction of serum magnesium levels would completely
resolve the symptoms. Further studies are needed to confirm these hypotheses. NIHSS, National Institute of Health Stroke Scale; NMDA,
N-methyl-d-aspartate; SAH, subarachnoid hemorrhage; WE, Wernicke’s encephalopathy Additional file 1: MRI, axial T1 sequence of the pons,
cerebellum and temporal poles showing no abnormalities. (JPG 265 kb) Additional file 2: MRI, axial T1 sequence of the pons, cerebellum and
temporal poles showing no abnormalities. (JPG 417 kb) Additional file 3: MRI, axial T1 sequence of the midbrain, perisylvian spaces and
temporo-occipital regions showing no abnormalities. (JPG 395 kb) Additional file 4: MRI, axial T1 sequence of the basal ganglia showing no
abnormalities. (JPG 277 kb) MRI, axial T1 sequence of the pons, cerebellum and temporal poles showing no abnormalities. (JPG 265 kb) MRI,
axial T1 sequence of the pons, cerebellum and temporal poles showing no abnormalities. (JPG 417 kb) MRI, axial T1 sequence of the midbrain,
perisylvian spaces and temporo-occipital regions showing no abnormalities. (JPG 395 kb) MRI, axial T1 sequence of the basal ganglia showing
no abnormalities. (JPG 277 kb) The authors would like to thank the patient and his family for their cooperation and consent in relation to
this study. We also want to thank the Research Committee of the Gerencia de Atención Integrada of Albacete for the support given for the
publication of this article. None funding declared Data of the clinical history of the patient (discharge summary, blood tests and
radiological tests) will not be shared to maintain his anonymity. However, these data are available for review by the by the Editor-in-Chief
of this journal. SGM, FHF, ASL interviewed, diagnosed and treated the patient. JZ, JPR performed the radiological tests, evaluated the
neuroimaging findings and gave important clinical opinions. ASL drafted the manuscript. FHF, TS participated in the design of the case
report and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.
A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The publication of this manuscript was
approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Committee of the Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete. Not applicable
