Malignant thymomas are rarely associated with bone metastasis and T-cell lymphocytosis. A 47–year-old female patient was admitted to our
hospital for ptosis. A diagnosis of malignant thymoma was made based on the thymectomy and pathological result. Peripheral T-cell
lymphocytosis and bone metastasis were found later. T-cell lymphocytosis was relived after surgical and radiation therapy to the metastasis.
Peripheral T-cell lymphocytosis is a rare paraneoplastic phenomenon associated with thymomas. This report is the first to describe an
invasive thymoma with late bone metastasis accompanied with T-cell lymphocytosis. We should be aware of peripheral T-cell lymphocytosis in
thymomas and it may contribute to a better understanding of the complex physiology and pathogenesis of thymoma. Thymomas are rare anterior
mediastinal tumors, which originate from the thymic epithelial cells. According to the pathologic classification developed by the World
Health Organization, thymomas are classified into five groups (type A, AB, B1, B2 and B3) by predominate cell type. Thymomas are usually
slow growing with more local recurrence rather than metastasis. Sporadic cases with late distant metastasis, including lungs, pleura, liver,
thyroid and bones, have been reported . The thymus gland is responsible for the maturation of T-lymphocyte and some other immunologic
function. Thus, the neoplastic thymoma is associated with an array of “paraneoplastic” syndromes such as myasthenia gravis, pure cell
aplasia, hypogammagloulinemia. However, T-cell lymphocytosis in peripheral blood is an extremely rare phenomeon. We report a 47-year-old
female patient with a previous history of myasthenia gravis (MG) and malignant thymoma, who developed thoracic vertebrae and paravertebrae
metastasis associated T-cell lymphocytosis. A 47–year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital in 2007 for ptosis. Laboratory tests
showed higher percentage of the lymphocytes (77.5 %) with 4.45 × 109/L leukocytes and 3.45 × 109/L lymphocytes. A chest computed tomography
scan showed an 11 cm × 9 cm × 9 cm irregular solid mass in the anterior mediastinum, with infiltration of the diaphragm and left chest wall.
She was diagnosed with MG and a mediastinal mass. Thymectomy detected a mediastinal mass infiltrating the pericardium and left pleura and
penetrating the left lung. In addition, second mass was found adherent to the left diaphragm. Both tumors were resected and histologically
classified as malignant thymoma (type AB) with infiltration of chest wall, diaphragm, pericardium, left pleura and lung. Regional nodules
were resected and showed lymphadenitis. The patient received ADOC chemotherapy (Cyclophosphamide, Doxorubicin, Cisplatin, Vincristine) and
radiation therapy after surgery and followed up with a relief of MG. The patient followed up with chest CT every year and local recurrence
in the left pleura was found in April, 2010. Unfortunately, the patient was found to have peripheral T-cell lymphocytosis in 2014.
Peripheral blood analysis showed mild lymphocytosis (5.3 × 109/L), with Lymphocytes representing 60.7 % of the peripheral blood leukocytes.
Flow cytometric analysis revealed that most of the lymphocytes were mature CD3+ CD5 + CD7+ T cells. Moreover, bone marrow aspiration and
biopsy showed normal cellular counts and percentage. The patient developed back pain and progressive lower extremity weakness in August
2015. She also complained of hypesthesia of lower limbs with urine incontinence. The thoracic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a
paravertebral mass between T9 to T12 level with spinal cord compression (Fig. 1). Laboratory tests showed mild leukocytosis (11.29 × 109/L)
with lymphocytosis (9.29 × 109/L). We performed posterior decompression, tumor resection with bone cement reconstruction and internal
fixation emergently. Immediately after the operation, the patient’s peripheral lymphocyte count decreased markedly from 5.61 × 109/L
preoperatively to 1.77 × 109/L. However, the lymphocyte count increased gradually to 13.97 × 109/L 4 days after surgery, and remained
elevated till discharge. One month later, she received radiation therapy again and the lymphocytosis resolved during the therapy (Fig. 2).
The pathology reported malignant thymoma (type B2, locally B3), and her muscle strength and urinary function recovered gradually.Fig.
1Preoperative T2-weighted magnetic resonance images of thoracic spine. a. sagittal image revealed a paravertebral mass between T9 and T12
level. b. coronal image of T7 vertebrae showed pleural mass. c. coronal image of T10 vertebrae showed spinal compressionFig. 2Variation of
peripheral leucocytes and lymphocyte count Preoperative T2-weighted magnetic resonance images of thoracic spine. a. sagittal image revealed
a paravertebral mass between T9 and T12 level. b. coronal image of T7 vertebrae showed pleural mass. c. coronal image of T10 vertebrae
showed spinal compression Variation of peripheral leucocytes and lymphocyte count Thymomas are one of the most common tumors in the anterior
mediastinum. Malignant thymomas are usually determined by the invasiveness into nearby tissues or distant metastasis. The recurrence of
thymomas is rare, and distant metastasis is reported by only a few cases . In the present study, the patient was diagnosed with malignant
thymoma with diaphragm and pleural infiltration at the onset. Interestingly the pathology classified the thymoma into type AB from the onset
but progressed into type B2/B3 in the bone metastasis 8 years later. We hypothesized that the biological behavior of thymomas might have
changed or progressed during time. On rare occasions peripheral T-cell lymphocytosis is associated with malignant thymomas. Only a few cases
have been reported, but the mechanism has not been well described until now. For example, Pedraza et al. reported the first case in 1977 ,
and Barton reviewed seven similar cases in 1997 . A few more cases were reported after then (Table 1). It seems that females were more
likely to suffer from this situation than males, which may help us to clarify the mechanism. In all these cases, T-cell lymphocytosis was
asscociated with aggressive thymomas, and most of them were relived after surgery or chemo/radiation therapy. On these conditions,
lymphoproliferative diseases should be first excluded, although it is more rarely coexist with thymomas. In our case, the flow cytometric
study showed a polyclonal T-cell population. The bone marrow examination also excluded bone marrow lymphocytosis as well as lymphocytic
leukemia. Therefore, we concluded that the T-cell lymphocytosis originated from peripheral.Table 1Case reviewAuthor,
yearPresentationInvasive or metastasisPeripheral lymphocytesTherapyOutcomePedraza, 1977 69y/maleLeft pleura15,000 leukocytes with 70 %
lymphocytesSurgery/radiotherapyResolvedGriffin et al., 1978 64y/femaleN/A25,000 leukocytes with 52 %
lymphocytesBiopsy/chemotherapyResolvedShachor et al., 1988 37y/femaleHeart/hilum/lung/pleura/chest wall28,000 leukocytes with 87 %
lymphocytesBiopsy/chemotherapy/radiotherapyResolvedMedeiros et al., 1993 66y/maleLung20,000 leukocytes with 80 %
lymphocytesBiopsy/chemotherapy/radiotherapyNot resolvedSmith et al., 1994 80y/femaleSoft tissue of the neck/ left brachiocephalic vein11,700
leukocytes with 59 % lymphocytesSurgery/radiotherapyResolvedSmith et al., 1994 55y/femaleLeft pleura16,300 leukocytes with 52 %
lymphocytesSurgery/chemotherapy/radiotherapyResolvedBarton, 1997 35y/femaleRight pleura20,100 leukocytes with 57 %
lymphocytesSurgery/radiotherapyResolvedOtton SH et al.2000 71y/maleN/A6500 lymphocytesSteroids & azathioprineNot resolvedMorales et al.,
2007 36y/maleLung/right pleura/chest wall13,800 leukocytes with 67 % lymphocytesSurgery/chemotherapy/radiotherapyNot resolvedChen HK et al.,
2009 62y/femaleLung18,000 leukocytes with 77.4 % lymphocytesSurgeryResolvedPuljiz Z et al., 2013 76y/femaleLung/liver34,400 leukocytes with
57 % lymphocytesSurgery/chemotherapy/radiotherapyPartially resolved Case review In our case, the percentage of lymphocyte was higher than
normal in 2007, and T-cell lymphocytosis was diagnosed in 2013. No therapy was conducted until the patient developed lower limb weakness.
Interestingly, T-cell lymphocytosis got relived immediately after the removal of the vertebral tumor. However the lymphocyte count elevated
4 days later. The radiation therapy was done and the lymphocyte counted decreased to normal again. Therefore, we concluded that T-cell
lymphocytosis was associated with malignant thymoma in this case. Previous cases showed that most T-cell lymphocytosis was relived after
tumor resection or chemotherapy/irradiation, indicating that lymphocytosis might be one of the paraneoplastic phenomena of thymoma. In
addition, T-cell lymphocytosis may be a prediction whether the thymoma is sensitive to the therapy. However, the mechanism has not been
fully elucidated. In most cases T-cell lymphocytosis quickly resolved after surgical resection and/or chemo/radiotherapy. Earlier studies
indicated a spillover from the lymphocyte-rich thymoma into the peripheral blood . However, later studies found differences between the
immunophenotype of the cells in thymoma and the peripheral T-cells. Given that the immunophenotypes of circulating lymphocytes were
polyclonal mature T cells, these cells were postulated to derive from the spillage of intratumoral lymphocytes into the circulation or a
reactive proliferation of peripheral lymphocytes, which was related to deregulated, thymoma-associated immunoresponse. Medeiros suggested
there was an immunoregulatory disorder mediated by thymic hormone released by the tumor. Most authors now agree that there may be a
physiologic imbalances with malignant thymic cells, which lead to immune disorders and finally to impaired proliferation, maturation, and
migration of T-cells . Peripheral T-cell lymphocytosis is a rare paraneoplastic phenomenon associated with thymomas. We propose that female
sex, lymphocyte-rich thymomas that behaved aggressively and invasively may be the risk factors in the majority of cases. As far as we know,
our report is the first to describe an invasive thymoma with late bone metastasis accompanied with T-cell lymphocytosis. Clinicians should
be aware of peripheral T-cell lymphocytosis in thymomas, although it is a rare manifestation of thymomas. It contributes to a better
understanding of the complex physiology and pathogenesis of thymoma. Moreover, further studies are needed to investigate the relationship
between T-cell lymphocytosis and thymoma. ADOC, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, cisplatin, vincristine; MG, myasthenia gravis; MRI, magnetic
resonance imaging The authors appreciate the patient’s consent to present this case. Not applicable. The datasets supporting the conclusions
of this article are included within the article and its additional files. LZ, XZ, ZL and YL participated in the surgery of this case. LZ and
ZL drafted the manuscript and all authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent form is available for review by the editor of this journal. Not applicable.
