In contrast to percutaneous atrial septal occluder device, surgical patch closure of atrial defects was known to be no infective
endocarditis risk. We herein report the first case of late endocarditis of surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects occurred at
47-year after surgery. On September 2014, a 56-year-old immunocompetent French Caucasian man was admitted into the Emergency Department for
3-week history of headache, acute decrease of psychomotor performance and fever at 40 °C. The diagnosis has been evoked during his admission
for the management of a brain abscess and confirmed using 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose gated cardiac computed tomography (18F-FDG-PET/CT).
Bacterial cultures of surgical deep samples of brain abscess were positive for Streptococcus intermedius and Aggregatibacter aphrophilus as
identified by the matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry and confirmed with 16S rRNA gene
sequencing. The patient was treated by antibiotics for 8 weeks and surgical patch closure removal. In summary, late endocarditis on surgical
patch and on percutaneous atrial septal occluder device of atrial septal defects is rare. Cardiac imaging by the 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose
gated cardiac computed tomography (18F-FDG-PET/CT) could improve the diagnosis and care endocarditis on surgical patch closure of atrial
septal defects while transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography remained difficult to interpret. Infectious complication of atrial
septal occlude device is rare that represented about 0.1 % of cases . We herein report the first case of endocarditis at 47-year after
surgical closure of atrial septal defects discovered by positron emission tomography with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose gated cardiac computed
tomography (18F-FDG-PET/CT). On September 2014, a 56-year-old immunocompetent French Caucasian man was admitted into the Emergency
Department for 3-week history of headache, acute decrease of psychomotor performance and fever at 40 °C. In his medical past-history, he
underwent a surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects for patent foramen ovale at 9 years old and dental care at 5 months before his
admission. Laboratory investigations revealed an elevated leukocyte count at 12.6 × 109/L with an elevated neutrophil count at 8.4 × 109/L,
a normal platelet count at 180 × 109/L, an elevated C reactive protein rate at 97 mg/L and negative blood culture. A brain magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a right occipital cerebral abscess (27 × 36 × 43 mm, hyper intense T2) (Fig. 1).Fig. 1A brain magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) showing a unique brain abscess (27 × 36 × 43 mm) A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showing a unique brain
abscess (27 × 36 × 43 mm) He underwent surgical brain abscess drainage. Bacterial cultures of surgical deep samples of brain abscess were
positive for Streptococcus intermedius and Aggregatibacter aphrophilus as identified by the matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time
of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry and confirmed with molecular identification (16 s gene sequencing). The patient was treated first
with an empiric antibiotherapy with cefotaxim 4 g every 8 h associated with metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h and cotrimoxazole 800/160 mg
every 8 h. One week later, the antibiotic treatment was modified for ceftriaxone 2 g/day associated with metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h and
rifampicin 300 mg every 8 h. A transthoracic echocardiographic examination and a body scan revealed no abnormality. A transesophageal
echocardiography showed a high right left shunt suggestive of atrial septal patch dehiscence without direct sign of. An 18F-FDG-PET/CT
showed an intense linear hypermetabolism opposite the interauricular septum compatible with an endocarditis on the intracardiac device
(Fig. 2). Transesophageal echocardiography after 6 weeks of antibiotic treatment showed a filamentous image opposite the mitral valve and no
vegetation image was found. A second 18F-FDG-PET/CT kept showing hypermetabolism on the surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects. The
patient was treated by antibiotics for 8 weeks.Fig. 2The 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose gated cardiac computed tomography (18F-FDG-PET/CT) imaging
showing hypermetabolism hyperactivity around the interauricular septum The 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose gated cardiac computed tomography
(18F-FDG-PET/CT) imaging showing hypermetabolism hyperactivity around the interauricular septum At the end of antibiotic treatment
transthoracic echocardiographic examination showed an exclusive right left shunt, confirming dehiscence of the surgical patch closure of
atrial septal defects. Surgical removal of surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects was necessary on April 2015 with replacement by a
bovine pericardial patch. No antibiotics were given during explantation. Explanted atrial surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects
looked swollen and calcified with negative bacterial cultures. The patient recovered without further complication. His hemiparesis fully
disappeared; he only kept discrete amnesic and attentional failures. He presents a sequelae of attentional and memory deficits at 1 year of
follow-up. In contrast to percutaneous atrial septal occluder device, surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects was known to be
associated with no infective endocarditis risk . To our best knowledge, only one case of endocarditis on surgical patch of ventricular
septal defect and 17 cases of bacterial endocarditis on percutaneous atrial septal occluder device have been reported. In our case, the late
onset of the infection occurred at 47-year after surgery, and it suggests that origin of endocarditis of surgical patch closure of atrial
septal defects was a hematogenous spread of bacteria during the dental care at 5 months before. Diagnosis of endocarditis on atrial septal
occluder device is generally done by transthoracic echocardiographic or transesophageal echocardiography. Therefore, in our case the
diagnosis has been evoked during his admission for the management of a brain abscess, and established using 18F-FDG-PET/CT while
transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography remained difficult to interpret. The benefit of 18F-FDG-PET/CT has been demonstrated in
the diagnosis of prosthetic valve endocarditis cardiac device-related endocarditis for detect infection by highlighting inflammatory
leukocytes express a high density of glucose transporters and are highly metabolically active with the high spatial resolution of cardiac
tomography and angiography, and it was recently added to the diagnosis of infective endocarditis criteria [16, 17]. In summary, late
endocarditis on surgical patch and on percutaneous atrial septal occluder device of atrial septal defects is rare. We believe that the
contribution of 18F-FDG-PET/CT could improve the diagnosis and care of endocarditis on surgical patch closure or percutaneous atrial septal
occluder device of atrial septal defects. A prolonged antibiotherapy and surgical management with surgical patch removal is a major
therapeutic option of endocarditis on surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects. the matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time
of flight mass spectrometry 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography magnetic resonance imaging Estelle
Honnorat and Piseth Seng contributed equally to this work EH involved in clinical data collection and the drafting of the manuscript. PS
involved in the drafting of the manuscript and manuscript revision. AR provided clinical data verification and revision of the manuscript.
GH provided clinical data verification and revision of the manuscript. AS provided clinical data verification, corrected the discussion
section, and approved the final version to be published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Catherine
Peruffo for her assistance in acquisition of data. The authors obtained permission from Catherine Peruffo to acknowledge. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Medical imaging data will not be shared because it is not fully anonymous. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. This study was approved by the
institutional research ethics board (Comite de Protection des Personnes Sud Méditerranée 1), and written informed consent was obtained from
the patient to participate to this case report and any accompanying images. The authors have no relevant affiliations or involvement with
any organization or entity with a financial interest or conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. No
writing assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.
