Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Source of support: This study was funded in part by a generous donation from the Demarest
Lloyd, Jr. Foundation Case series Patients: — Final Diagnosis: Allergic proctocolitis Symptoms: Hematochezia • fussiness Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Pediatrics and Neonatology Unusual clinical course The prevalence of allergic diseases has been
dramatically rising in the United States and other developed nations over recent decades. Growing evidence suggests a partial role for the
microbiome in the development of these allergic diseases. Food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis (AP) (also referred to as cow’s milk
protein intolerance or allergy) is among the earliest and most common food allergic diseases of infancy, yet its patho physiology is not
well understood. The currently accepted clinical practice is to restrict the diet until 12 months of age. We present 4 cases of clinically
diagnosed AP whose symptoms quickly and completely resolved with probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) monotherapy. All 4 infants
avoided any dietary restrictions. The range of time from probiotic initiation to symptom resolution was 7–28 days. These cases suggest an
important role for the infant intestinal microbiome in the development of gastrointestinal mucosal food allergies such as AP. Prospective
investigation of the intestinal microbiome in infants with AP may further our understanding of this disease’s pathogenesis. The potential
use of probiotic monotherapy in the treatment of AP also warrants further investigation. The prevalence of allergic diseases has been
dramatically rising in the United States and other developed nations in recent decades . Food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis (AP) is
among the earliest and most common food allergic diseases of infancy, yet its pathophysiology is not well understood. AP typically presents
in early infancy with mucous and blood in the stool (either hematochezia or guaiac-positive stools) and non-specific symptoms of fussiness,
difficulty feeding, and gastroesophageal reflux. Symptoms typically resolve with dietary antigen restriction, and cow’s milk is the most
common trigger. Symptoms suggestive of AP afflict upwards of 10–15% of infants, though only 2–3% are diagnosed with challenge-proven cow’s
milk protein allergy . Current guidelines for the treatment of suspected AP recommend maternal dietary restriction of the most common
allergenic proteins in breastfed infants (cow’s milk and soy) or a trial of extensively hydrolyzed formula in formula-fed infants . Recent
hypotheses to explain the rise in immune-related diseases have suggested that the Western lifestyle sets the stage for allergic and
autoimmune diseases by altering our exposure to microbes, causing perturbations in the colonization of the intestinal mucosa and affecting
mucosal immune system development . There is evidence that adjunctive therapy with probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) may hasten
symptom resolution from AP when combined with hydrolyzed formula . There are no reports of probiotic monotherapy in these infants. With the
now ubiquitous marketing and parental awareness of probiotics, we have observed a trend toward increasing use of probiotics during infancy,
including as an ‘intervention’ by parents and primary care providers for a diverse range of GI symptoms. Over the past few years, we have
noted that the symptoms of some infants with AP resolve quite quickly while taking probiotics, even in the absence of typical elimination of
milk or other major allergens in several infants. We describe 4 such cases of clinically diagnosed AP whose symptoms resolved entirely with
LGG monotherapy, without any need for dietary food antigen elimination. Patient A is a term female conceived via in-vitro fertilization and
born via C-section for post-dates pregnancy and an unfavorable cervix. She had no post-natal exposure to antibiotics and was exclusively
breastfed (with an unrestricted maternal diet). She presented at 3 months of age to her pediatrician with a 1-week history of persistent
grossly bloody guaiac-positive stools. Her parents described streaks and flecks of blood in her stool. There was no evidence of anal
fissures, intestinal infection, or other obvious causes of rectal bleeding. A clinical diagnosis of allergic proctocolitis was made. Her
family was resistant to dietary modification, and she was started empirically on LGG. Her bloody stools completely resolved over the
following 10 days, and she was guaiac-negative after 2 weeks on LGG. Her mother continued breastfeeding throughout infancy while eating an
unrestricted diet. At her well-child visits at 4, 6, and 9 months of age, the infant remained on LGG and had guaiac-negative stools. She
tolerated standard introduction of solid foods, including those containing dairy products. She had no recurrence of any symptoms of AP.
Patient B is a term female born via emergency C-section without other complications of pregnancy or delivery, who was exclusively breastfed
with an unrestricted maternal diet. She presented to her pediatrician at 1 month of age with fussiness, gassiness, increased spitting up,
and mucous-like guaiac-positive stools in the absence of anal fissures or indication of infection. She was otherwise well. A clinical
diagnosis of allergic proctocolitis was made, and she was started empirically on LGG without any dietary modifications. Her mother continued
exclusive breastfeeding without any changes to her diet. Patient B’s symptoms resolved. She was asymptomatic and guaiac-negative at her
subsequent 2-month well-child visit, and remained asymptomatic at her 4-month visit. She had no recurrence of any symptoms of AP. Patient C
is a term female born via normal spontaneous vaginal delivery without complications of pregnancy or delivery. She was exclusively breastfed.
Her mother is a vegetarian, but consumed normal amounts of cow’s milk protein and did not restrict any major allergens. At 1 month of age,
she presented to her pediatrician with fussiness and increased spitting up. At 2 months of age, she had increased frequency of stools but
they were not yet guaiac tested. Two weeks later, she was noted to have flecks of gross blood in her stool, and was persistently guaiac-
positive at her next visit at 3 months of age. There were no anal fissures or indication of infectious or other causes. She was clinically
diagnosed with AP and started on LGG. Seventeen days later, she was seen in follow-up. Her fussiness and grossly bloody stools had resolved,
and her stool was guaiac-negative in the office. Her mother remained on a dairy-containing diet. At 9 months of age, she remained
asymptomatic, had tolerated the introduction of yogurt, and remained guaiac-negative. She is now 2 years old and drinks whole cow’s milk.
She had no recurrence of any symptoms of AP. Patient D is a term male born via repeat C-section without complications of pregnancy or
delivery. He was exclusively breastfed from birth with an unrestricted maternal diet. His stool was tested at his 1-month well-child visit
for symptoms of intermittent fussiness, spitting up, and a sibling with a history of allergic proctocolitis. He was guaiac-positive and
there were no anal fissures or indication of infectious or other causes. Over the next week, he remained persistently guaiac-positive. At 32
days of age, he was clinically diagnosed with AP and started on LGG, while his mother continued breastfeeding with an unrestricted maternal
diet. At his 2-month well-child visit, his symptoms had resolved and his stools were guaiac-negative. He tolerated standard introduction of
unrestricted solid foods at 4 months of age and remained asymptomatic and guaiac-negative at his 6-month well-child visit. In these 4 cases,
complete symptom resolution (including transitioning from persistently guaiac-positive to guaiac-negative stools) occurred in a mean of 16.3
days with a range of 7–28 days, as shown in Table 1. All 4 infants were able to tolerate cow’s milk protein in their maternal breast milk,
avoiding dietary restriction or hydrolyzed formula, and they each subsequently tolerated the standard introduction of solid foods. The dose
of LGG used in these cases was between 2.5 and 5 billion colony-forming units (CFU) per day. The prevalence of allergic diseases is on the
rise, and some have hypothesized that this may be driven by changes in our microbiome . Food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis (AP) is
among the earliest and most common food allergic diseases of infancy, yet its pathophysiology is not well understood. AP is diagnosed
clinically in infants with persistently guaiac-positive or grossly bloody stools in the absence of other causes. Current guidelines
recommend treatment with dietary restriction for 2 to 4 weeks, followed by an open challenge under medical supervision . In clinical
practice, though, AP is typically treated empirically with dietary restriction until 12 months of age. There is some evidence that the
addition of a probiotic (LGG) improves outcomes . Probiotic monotherapy in AP has not been reported. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first case report of infants with AP resolving on probiotic monotherapy. Recent evidence from our group and others suggests that
allergic proctocolitis is associated with the diagnosis of other allergic intestinal diseases, specifically eosinophilic esophagitis, later
in childhood. Other risk factors for the development of eosinophilic esophagitis included cesarean section and antibiotic use early in life,
suggesting a possible shared pathophysiology related to the intestinal microbiome . We hypothesize that insults to the normal development of
the infant intestinal microbiome result in dysbiosis in early infancy and confer risk for the development of allergic proctocolitis and
perhaps other gastrointestinal food allergic diseases throughout childhood. Some have suggested that current clinical practice of
presumptive diagnosis of AP without histopathology leads to significant over-diagnosis of AP . But clinically, sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy
is rarely performed in infants with only rectal bleeding because of its invasiveness (unless there are symptoms indicative of other possible
etiologies, such as poor growth, excessively irritability, or profuse bleeding). Furthermore, there is growing evidence that there may be
negative (allergic) consequences to strict avoidance of dietary antigens during infancy . Therefore, evaluation of interventions that may
mitigate the need for dietary restriction in infancy is timely and important. We cannot say that the infants reported here achieved
resolution with LGG sooner than they would have without LGG and, indeed, well-designed studies assessing the natural history of AP are
lacking. Careful prospective investigation of the infant intestinal microbiome and its role in gastrointestinal food allergic diseases may
reveal novel pathophysiology in this disease. Randomized clinical trials investigating the management of food-induced allergic proctocolitis
are needed. This series of cases also suggests that the use of probiotics as monotherapy in the treatment of food-induced allergic
proctocolitis warrants further study. Statement None of the authors have financial relationships relevant to this article to disclose. None
of the authors have conflicts of interest to disclose. No honorarium, grant, or other form of payment was given to anyone to produce the
manuscript. The foundation had no role in study design; the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; the writing of the report; or
the decision to submit the paper for publication. Four cases of presumed allergic proctocolitis resolution with LGG monotherapy. From
initiation of LGG to guaiac negative stools.
