Lichen sclerosus is an uncommon inflammatory dermatosis with preferential involvement of the urogenital region. The extragenital involvement
is uncommon and is characterized by small rounded macules or papules, pearly white in color. The coexistence of lichen sclerosus and
scleroderma plaques in most cases with extragenital location has been reported in the literature. We report a case of lichen sclerosus
associated with scleroderma in children, highlighting the importance of dermoscopy in diagnosis. Female patient, 9 years old, white, with
asymptomatic hypochromic lesions initially on the hands with subsequent progression to feet and knees, for about 8 months. Dermatological
examination revealed polygonal, pearly papules, with parchment-like surface, which agglomerated on plaques in hands, feet and knees (Figure
1). Some of these lesions presented central blackish points. On the right wrist and dorsum of the feet there were poorly defined areas of
hyperpigmentation and skin atrophy, intermingled with hypochromic lesions described above (Figure 2). General physical and laboratory
examination showed no alterations. Dermoscopy of hand, feet and knees lesions showed multiple whitish areas, some surrounded by an
erythematous halo, with the presence of whitish amorphous areas and pseudocomedones (Figure 3). On the clinical and dermoscopic findings the
diagnosis of extragenital lichen sclerosus associated with localized scleroderma was established. Figure 1 Pearly papules lesions,
polygonal, confluent, with parchment-like surface, on the back of the hand Pearly papules lesions, polygonal, confluent, with parchment-like
surface, on the back of the hand Figure 2 White-pearly papules surrounded by hyperchromic halo, poorly delimited, associated with areas of
atrophy, on the back of the foot White-pearly papules surrounded by hyperchromic halo, poorly delimited, associated with areas of atrophy,
on the back of the foot Figure 3 Dermoscopy of the lesions on the back of the hand: multiple whitish areas, some surrounded by an
erythematous halo, with the presence of whitish amorphous areas and pseudo-comedones Dermoscopy of the lesions on the back of the hand:
multiple whitish areas, some surrounded by an erythematous halo, with the presence of whitish amorphous areas and pseudo-comedones Lichen
sclerosus (LS) was first described in the late nineteenth century by Hallopeau. 1 It is considered a chronic inflammatory dermatosis of the
dermal papilla, which is characterized by the presence of asymptomatic white polygonal papules that coalesce to form a plaque with points
corresponding to follicular pseudo-aperture. 2-4 With time these lesions become increasingly atrophic with rough surface. 5 Classically it
occurs in the genital area, but it also has extragenital manifestations, with a variety of clinical presentations. 3 LS can exist in
isolation in 6% of cases, or in association with genital LS in 15-20% of presentations. 3-5 The disease affects people of any age but is
rare in childhood, with an estimated prevalence of at least 1 in 900 children. When present in children, the appearance of symptoms occurs
between two and five years of age. 4 The etiology is still not clear, but there is evidence of association with HLA Class I antigens and
with HLA-A29/B44, infections by human papillomavirus (HPV) and spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, autoimmune and hormonal phenomena, and
trauma (through the Koebner phenomenon). 4,6 There may be an overlap between LS and morphea, considered as two distinct entities. 4 A recent
study with 472 patients indicates that there is a higher frequency of LS in patients with localized scleroderma than in the general
population, suggesting a common physiopathological autoimmune mechanism.7 Diagnosis is usually clinical and may be supplemented with
dermoscopy, with no need for histopathological examination when the lesions are typical. 5 In dermoscopy recent LS lesions are characterized
by homogeneous whitish areas with erythematous halo (Figure 4), with the presence of yellow circles (follicular pseudo-apertures - comedo-
like openings), which complies with the histopathologic features of ortohyperkeratosis and follicular plugging. 8 Older lesions present no
halo, with poorly-defined diffuse margins, corresponding in histopathology to epidermal atrophy with flattening of the rete ridges, fibrosis
in upper dermis with lichenoid lymphocytic infiltrate and collagen homogenization.2,8 Figure 4 Dermoscopy showing disease activity:
amorphous whitish central area and erythematous halo in the lesion on the back of the hand Dermoscopy showing disease activity: amorphous
whitish central area and erythematous halo in the lesion on the back of the hand Currently there is still no effective treatment for LS, and
the majority of patients are initially treated with potent topic corticosteroids. Alternatives are topic calcineurin inhibitors, topic and
systemic retinoid, antimalarial drugs and phototherapy. 4,5 Dermoscopy is a practical optical tool, easy to handle, which, associated with
typical clinical features, can assist in the early diagnosis of LS, with no need for invasive examinations. Study performed at Hospital
Universit√°rio Pedro Ernesto - Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (HUPE-UERJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil. Financial Support: None.
Conflict of interest: None.
