Porokeratosis is a disorder of epidermal keratinization characterized clinically by a distinctive ridge-like border, and histologically by
cornoid lamellae. The known clinical variants of porokeratosis are: classic porokeratosis of Mibelli, disseminated superficial (actinic)
porokeratosis (DSAP), porokeratosis palmaris et plantaris disseminata, linear porokeratosis and punctate porokeratosis. In 1995, a seventh
form was described as porokeratosis ptychotropica: a verrucous form resembling psoriasis involving the gluteal cleft presenting on the
histological exam multiple cornoid lamellae. There are very few reports in the literature of this clinical variant. The present study
describes the case of a healthy male presenting gluteal hyperkeratotic plaques for 22 years. He had been to several dermatologists, none of
them had achieved a definitive diagnosis. We present a typical clinical presentation and its dermoscopy findings, in addition to
histological examination that confirmed the diagnosis. Male patient, 41 years old, hypertensive, in use of captopril and Ginkgo biloba,
sought the dermatology service for dermatosis located in gluteal region for about 22 years, with progressive growth. He reported having
previously sought other services and having received treatment for psoriasis and widespread warts, but without success. At physical
examination, he presented symmetrical skin lesions in the gluteal region, characterized by extensive erythematous to wine color plaques,
with hyperkeratotic surface, precise edges and irregular contours (Figures 1 and 2). Dermoscopy showed prominent hyperkeratosis thoroughly,
with well-defined borders and no evidence of other structures (Figure 3). Figure 1Gluteal lesions characterized by hyperkeratotic plaques
Figure 2Detail of the periphery of the lesion in the left gluteus Figure 3Contact dermoscopic examination in polarized light showing
hyperkeratosis and well-defined edge Gluteal lesions characterized by hyperkeratotic plaques Detail of the periphery of the lesion in the
left gluteus Contact dermoscopic examination in polarized light showing hyperkeratosis and well-defined edge Facing the possible
differential diagnoses of disseminated warts and psoriasis, we opted for a biopsy and immunosuppression research with serologic tests.
Anatomopathologic results revealed the presence of multiple cornoid lamellae and intense hyperkeratosis (Figure 4). Serologic tests for
hepatitis B and C, syphilis and HIV were negative. Figure 4 Histology stained by HE, increased x100. Presence of multiple cornoid lamellae
and intense hyperkeratosis Histology stained by HE, increased x100. Presence of multiple cornoid lamellae and intense hyperkeratosis In
1995, Lucker et al described the first case of porokeratosis ptychotropica using the Greek words ptyche (fold) and trope (a turning) to
describe the flexural distribution of this condition.1 The presented clinical condition is characteristic of this disease; however, given
its rarity, more common diagnoses should be excluded. 1,2 The main differential diagnoses are common warts and psoriasis.2,3 In dermoscopy
of verruca vulgaris, papillomatosis and dilation of the capillaries of the dermal papillae are observed, and hyperkeratosis may be evidenced
according to the clinical presentation of the lesion.4 In the case of porokeratosis ptychotropica, only hyperkeratosis was observed and the
other components of the viral warts were missing. Histological examination was crucial for the diagnosis and exclusion of differential
diagnoses. The absence of papillomatosis, dilation of dermal capillaries and koilocytosis ruled out viral warts. Regular acanthosis, Munro's
microabscess or other characteristic findings of psoriasis also were not observed. On the other hand, multiple cornoid lamellae,
establishing yielded the diagnosis diagnosis. The patient was possibly immunocompetent due to nonreactive serology; however, it was not
pursued further research into the possibility of other causes of immunosuppression, since the patient's immunity does not appear to
interfere with the clinical manifestation of this form of porokeratosis.5 Several therapeutic modalities have been described, ranging from
topical, such as imiquimod and tretinoin, to cryotherapy, photodynamic therapy, CO2 laser, surgical excision and oral retinoids. However,
the condition has been reported to be unresponsive to these therapies.5 Due to the exuberant clinical condition, disease rarity and
difficulty both in diagnosis and in treatment, the reported case is of great importance for the dermatological clinical practice, since it
can be misdiagnosed as other common dermatoses or even sexually transmitted diseases. Study performed at Hospital da Santa Casa de
Misericórdia de São Paulo - São Paulo (SP), Brazil. Financial Support: None. Conflict of Interests: None.
