Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is an acute febrile rash, usually induced by drugs, which recently has been linked to
spider bite. We report a case of a male patient, 48 years old, with an erythematous rash accompanied by fever and small non-follicular
pustules. He reported previous pain in the buttock with the onset of a necrotic plaque. The lesion was compatible with spider bite of the
genus Loxosceles. According to the EuroSCAR group instrument, the patient scored +10 indicating definite diagnosis of AGEP. As the patient
had a compatible lesion and had no other triggers of AGEP, in an Loxosceles endemic area, the AGEP would be associated with spider bite, as
described in other publications. Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is an acute febrile rash, characterized by numerous small
non-follicular and sterile pustules on erythematous base.1-3 Over 90% of the cases are induced by drugs. Occasionally, AGEP is caused by
infections and exposure to mercury and rarely it may be the consequence of a spider bite, as in the case reported.4,5 Male patient, 48 years
old, from the metropolitan area of Porto Alegre (RS), sought medical attention due to disseminated erythematous lesions and fever for the
past four days. He reported a spider bite in the right buttock region. The spider was not found and the patient reported pain in the area
while sleeping in his beach house. In 48 hours a violaceous spot appeared on the site. On the third day he presented an erythematous
eruption accompanied by several disseminated small non-follicular pustules, fever over 38ºC and pruritus (Figure 1). Figure 1 Erythema and
pustules on the abdômen Erythema and pustules on the abdômen The gluteal lesion evolved, in four days, with the onset of a necrotic plaque,
dry and well delimited. The edema and erythema adjacent to the lesion increased (Figure 2). The patient denied use of painkillers or other
drugs. Since infection was suspected, cephalexin was prescribed. He presented leukocytosis (27,260 leukocytes, with predominance of
neutrophils) and increased transaminases (ALT 268; AST 56), GGT (366) and bilirubin (TB 2.5, IB 1.7, DB 0.8). As viral serology was negative
and the diagnosis was AGEP, treatment was begun with prednisone (80 mg / day). Figure 2 Necrotic plaque on the right buttock, surrounded by
erythema and non-follicular pustules Necrotic plaque on the right buttock, surrounded by erythema and non-follicular pustules The clinical
picture progressed with diffuse desquamation and periorbital edema (Figure 3), as well as of hands and feet. On palms and plants, there was
the onset of blisters with later desquamation. There was clinical and laboratorial improvement, which prompted gradual decrease of
prednisone until its suspension. The buttock lesion evolved with detachment of the necrotic plaque and local ulcer. Histopathology showed
pustular dermatitis with neutrophilic vasculitis, focally purpuric, discrete edema in the dermal papillae and absence of leukocytoclasia
(Figures 4 and 5). Figure 3 Desquamation of back Desquamation of back Figure 4 Intraepidermal pustule and mild spongiosis. Discreet edema of
dermal papillae and inflammatory perivascular infiltrate in the derm (hematoxilin-eosin, 40x to the left and 100x to the right)
Intraepidermal pustule and mild spongiosis. Discreet edema of dermal papillae and inflammatory perivascular infiltrate in the derm
(hematoxilin-eosin, 40x to the left and 100x to the right) Figure 5 Vessel in the derm with inflammatory perivascular infiltrate,
predominantly neutrophilic, with some lymphocytes (hematoxilin-eosin, 100x) Vessel in the derm with inflammatory perivascular infiltrate,
predominantly neutrophilic, with some lymphocytes (hematoxilin-eosin, 100x) The Loxosceles genus can be found all over Brazil, mainly in the
state of Parana. They are small spiders, non-agressive, of nocturnal habits that bite when compressed against the human body.2,6 The
diagnosis of loxoscelism is rarely based on the identification of the spider. Unless the patient captures the spider and brings it over for
identification, the diagnosis is presumptive. In Brazil, 10,000 cases of Loxosceles bites are reported annually.6,7 The bite is painless and
causes local edema and erythema. There may be onset of ecchymotic areas mixed with paleness, blisters or necrosis. The lesion is prone to
progress gravitationally, due to the action of hyaluronidase present in the venom.7 Systemic loxoscelism is rare and commonly associated
with discreet symptoms, such as malaise and myalgia. There may also be mild hemolysis or, rarely, in the more severe forms, hemolytic anemia
and acute renal lesion caused by severe hemolysis.5,6 In spite of the uniformity of the initial lesion being not characteristic, its
evolution with detachment of the necrotic plaque and formation of ulcer is compatible with Loxosceles spider bite, especially because it is
an endemic area.6,7 Exanthema following spider bite is uncommon. It occurs in 72 hours and is characterized as morbiliform or scarlatiniform
rash.8 Palpable purple, pustular exanthema and even a mix of these two findings have been described.8 Recently, Loxosceles bite has been
linked to AGEP.1-5 The triggering of AGEP after spider bite is rare, and its mechanism is not well understood. In the pathogenesis of AGEP,
IL-8 (interleukin-8) and GMCSF (Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor) are implicated in polymorphonuclear recruiting for the
epidermis. IL-8 is produced by keratinocytes and T-cells. The venom of this spider contains sphingomyelinase, which stimulates the
liberation of cytokines, including a great amount of IL-8 and GM-CSF, which would trigger AGEP.2 The clinical picture of AGEP is
characterized by the abrupt onset of erythema and edema in intertriginous areas or in the face, with craniocaudal dissemination and the
arising of hundreds of small non-follicular and sterile pustules. It may be preceded or accompanied by high fever and pruritus. Pustules
have an average duration of nine days, evolving with desquamation. Multiform erythema-type lesions, edema of face and hands, purpura,
vesicles, blisters and involvement of mucosae are additional findings, some of them found in the case described.1,9,10 Histology may reveal
spongiosis and subcorneal or intraepidermal pustules. There is edema in the dermal papillae, which may vary in intensity, neutrophils and
eosinophils perivascular infiltrate and, sometimes, leukocytoclastic vasculitis. There may be focal necrosis of keratinocytes.1,9,10 In the
complementary evaluation, there may be leukocytosis, with predominance of neutrophils and eosinophils, transitory loss of renal function and
increased aminotransferases, findings that would justify some laboratorial changes found in the case described.1 According to EuroSCAR
group's scoring system (European project dedicated to severe cutaneous adverse reactions), used in the identification of AGEP cases, the
patient scored +10, indicating definite diagnosis of AGEP (Table 1).9 AGEP score of patient determined by the use of criteria from EuroSCAR
study group Interpretation according to final score: ≤ 0: absence of AGEP; 1-4: possible AGEP; 5-7: probable AGEP; 8-12: AGEP as certain
diagnosis As the patient had a lesion compatible with Loxosceles spider bite, without presenting other known AGEP triggers in a region where
this spider is endemic, the conclusion was that AGEP would be associated with spider bite, as described in other publications.2,4,5,8 The
increase of bilirubins may be attributed to mild hemolysis, frequently found in loxoscelism.6 There is a report that histologically
characterizes the exanthema after spider bite not linked to AGEP as necrotizing vasculitis, similar to the one observed in the bite area,
but without epidermal necrosis.8 These alterations were not found in our patient, whose anatomopathological results were compatible with
AGEP. The prognosis of AGEP is good when triggered by medication.1 Due to few reports of cases linked to spider bite, it is not clear if
there is alteration of the prognostic. Other reports had their etiological diagnosis made difficult by the simultaneous and early use of
antibiotics. In this report, as the patient started their use when he already presented lesions with AGEP characteristics, the antibiotic
did not seem relevant in triggering the pathology. Treatment is symptomatic.1 A short course of systemic corticoid may be considered in
severe cases, but usually it is not necessary, due to the self-limiting character of lesions.3,10 This report of AGEP associated with spider
bite aims to point out to this rare triggering factor in Brazil, where incidents by Loxosceles bites are frequent. Work performed at
Dermatology Service of Hospital Complex of Santa Casa de Misericórdia de Porto Alegre. Financial Support: None. Conflict of interest: None.
