The use of mobile phones has become an integral part of everyday life. Young people in particular can be observed using their smartphones
constantly, and they not only make or receive calls but also use different applications or just tap touch screens for several minutes at a
time. The opportunities provided by smartphones are attractive, and the cumulative time of using smartphones per day is very high for many
people, so the question arises whether we can really speak of a mobile phone addiction? In this study, our aim is to describe and analyze a
possible case of smartphone addiction. We present the case of Anette, an 18-year-old girl, who is characterized by excessive smartphone use.
We compare Anette’s symptoms to Griffiths’s conception of technological addictions, Goodman’s criteria of behavioral addictions, and the
DSM-5 criteria of gambling disorder. Anette fulfills almost all the criteria of Griffiths, Goodman, and the DSM-5, and she spends about 8 hr
in a day using her smartphone. Anette’s excessive mobile phone usage includes different types of addictive behaviors: making selfies and
editing them for hours, watching movies, surfing on the Internet, and, above all, visiting social sites. The cumulative time of these
activities results in a very high level of smartphone use. The device in her case is a tool that provides these activities for her whole
day. Most of Anette’s activities with a mobile phone are connected to community sites, so her main problem may be a community site
addiction. The media constantly emphasize the idea that life would be unimaginable without mobile phones. As mobile phones are constantly
becoming “smarter” and more modern, mobile phone advertisements suggest that our social or intergroup status is determined by the brand of
our phones. Current manufacturers’ main marketing strategy is that they supply phones with functions and accessories such that they are in
easy reach in every situation and are able to solve every kind of problems (with nationwide network/Internet coverage, GPS, huge/expandable
memory, external batteries, waterproof bags, camera accessories, music player accessories, solar charger, and flashlight). With the use of
the Internet, the number of applications available to download on your phone is limitless, it can be newspaper or book reading, installing
games, or even locating friends. The most important reason for using a mobile phone is to keep in touch with people, followed by its
function as a status symbol and as a useful tool for safety reasons (to be reachable in the case of emergency) (Balakrishnan & Raj, 2012).
Leung and Wei (1999) identified seven factors, which make possessing and using mobile phones appealing to individuals: fashion/status,
affection/sociability, relaxation, mobility, immediate access, mediation, and reassurance. In their research with U.S. college students,
Aoki and Downes (2003) identified the leading reasons for purchasing a mobile phone: a sense of security (e.g., when night driving),
continuous storage of information (phone numbers, SMSs, and files), social interactions with friends and family, and maintaining a private
life. Leung and Wei’s (1999) research found that mobile phone users are younger, richer, and better educated than non-users, suggesting that
mobile phones may indeed function as status symbols; therefore, the lack of an appropriate device may lead to social exclusion (Charlton,
Panting, & Hannan, 2002; Ling, 2000; Pavis, Hubbard, & Platt, 2001). However, it is worth noting that this research has become less relevant
over the years, due to the accelerated social changes, and the availability and necessity of phones, nearly everyone owns a mobile phone.
Nowadays, it is rather the possession of a newer or older model, which may show similar social differences. Smetanuik (2014) examined
predictions regarding problematic cell phone use. Depression, extraversion, and age predicted a high score on the Adapted Cell Phone
Addiction Test. Similarly, in an another study, results show that extroverts use their mobiles far more, but not necessarily in situations
when they are in public view (Turner, Love, & Howell, 2008). Neurotic individuals need to be in a large open space while talking on the
phone, but no direct relationship was found between the regularity of use and neuroticism. Nevertheless, neurotics become distracted much
more easily and tend to react more roughly in such situations than extroverts. Haug et al. (2015) identified indicators of smartphone
addiction using a short version of the Smartphone Addiction Scale for Adolescents in Switzerland. Smartphone addiction occurred in 256 of
the 1,519 students, mainly in younger adolescents (15–16 years) compared with young adults (19 years and older), and in persons reporting
lower physical activity. Demirci, Akgönül, and Akpinar (2015) found that the Smartphone Addiction Scale scores of females were higher than
those of males; furthermore, positive correlations were found between the Smartphone Addiction Scale scores and levels of anxiety and
depression. According to Cassidy (2006), smartphone usage among the young is considered a positive, rather than a negative, addiction. This
is because the social advantages derived from usage (e.g., to be reachable and as a sign of higher social status, especially when owning a
new model) usually compensate for the disadvantages (e.g., financial problems and problems with teachers and parents). To measure the
prevalence of possible problem users, Bianchi and Phillips (2005) made a Mobile Phone Problem Use Scale (MPPUS). MPPUS is a unifactorial
tool, which contains 27 items. Another tool is the Problematic Mobile Phone Use Questionnaire in which the 30 items are loaded into four
factors (dangerous use, prohibited use, dependence symptoms, and financial problems) (Billieux, Van der Linden, & Rochat, 2008). Our aim in
this study is to describe and discuss a possible case of smartphone addiction. We try to fit the case to the criteria of behavioral
addiction using Griffiths’s (2000) and Goodman’s (1990) conceptions and the DSM-5 criteria of gambling disorder (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013). Anette is an 18-year-old girl who lives with her mother. Her parents are divorced; her mother has experienced depressive
symptoms; her father suffered from alcohol and gambling addiction, and he harassed them regularly. He had a strong aptitude for suicide and
made two suicide attempts. Anette did not have a good relationship with her father, saying “we were like strangers living under the same
roof.” Her father accepted their shallow relationship, and it hurt her that her father did not want to bring about any change in their
relationship. Anette was sent to us by her mother, who had taken part in a presentation about excessive mobile phone usage. She was
cooperative all the time; she did not consider her excessive phone usage. She told us that she could give up her cell phone usage if she
really wanted to, but in that case she would be abandoned by her friends and therefore she did not want to do so. During the conversations,
she filled out the Beck Depressive Questionnaire, which indicated a mild depression. Currently, she is in her second year at a business
trade school and is studying to become a salesclerk. She does not care about her schooling. Six years earlier, when she was 12, she received
her first smartphone. At first, she rarely used it; however, as smartphone functions became more comprehensive, she spent more and more time
with it. Currently, she uses her cell phone 6–7 hr per day. This usage is not continuous; however, she feels a gradually growing pressure to
use her mobile phone approximately every 15 min. She manages everything with her smartphone and uses plenty of applications, for example,
photo editor, music recognition, or public sites. Interestingly, she rarely makes phone calls, and the monthly fee that can be used for
phone calls is not used up entirely for every month. Anette knows that she ought to use her smartphone less often; however, she rarely
manages to do this. She is in the inchoative stage of problem admission. On a cognitive level, she has understood that she needs to use her
cell phone less often; however, this idea has not yet turned into action. She feels that she always has to be available for her
acquaintances, which is why she checks her cell phone continuously. If she finds herself without her cell phone, she borrows or steals one
from one of her friends in her social group and uses it. Currently, her relationships with her peers have become shallow; in her social
life, she wants to have everybody’s attention and make friends. However, these friendships usually last for 2–3 weeks. She meets lots of
boys, but her relationships with them are not long-lasting. She often chooses her smartphone over her peers, and when going out with them
she often uses her smartphone there too. Her friends tolerate this behavior, and although she does not take part in most of the social
interactions, she is not excluded. It has occurred that when she was on a holiday with her peers, she stayed in the apartment 50% of time
and used her mobile phone while her peers were at the beach. On the other hand, in most of the cases, she stays in touch with her friends
via phone and public sites. She added “If my smartphone is not turned on, I will feel that I will miss something, but if my smartphone is
on, I also check it continuously.” After using the smartphone, she feels a short period of relaxation followed by a gradually growing
distress, which can be reduced only by another session with the phone. The use of a cell phone is a negative reinforcement for her, and she
said “it is not a satisfactory feeling, but it does not hurt, and I am not so often anxious.” During the therapy, which lasted approximately
2 years, the psychoanalytic approach and methods were used. Anette had difficulties dealing with her negative emotions; instead of facing
them she denied, repressed, and projected them. This is why the focus of the therapy was to work with the defense mechanisms, to identify
her emotions, and to provoke in her a need for relationships. Anette quit the therapy several times; however, she always decided to continue
it after a short break. Leaving the therapy was a way for her to escape her negative emotions and to avoid reliving her original trauma. She
left the therapy several months ago, saying “I want to discuss something with myself.” An essential question is whether we can talk about
mobile phone addiction in Anette’s case or whether another diagnosis is more appropriate when describing her behavior. Anette fits to the
addiction criteria conceptualized by Goodman (1990) in a format similar to that of DSM-III-R (American Psychiatric Association, 1987), as
shown in Table 1. These criteria are general terms and not restricted by reference to a particular behavior; they are capable of determining
whether a given behavioral syndrome (excessive smartphone use in this case) is an addictive disorder. Smartphone addiction as a behavioral
addiction according to Goodman’s criteria (1990, p. 1404) Griffiths (2000) described mobile phone addiction as a “technological addiction”
that involves human–machine interaction. Within this model, problematic mobile phone use can be described by components, such as
preoccupation, mood modification, salience, tolerance, withdrawal, and relapse. Anette fulfills all the components of this model too. Mood
modification presents because Anette’s anxiety decreases during smartphone usage. Salience occurs because she always charges her phone
before leaving home and her cognition revolves around smartphones all time. If she does not use her phone, she feels a craving. With her
frequent usage, she often disrupts social norms. During her addictive career, she experienced tolerance; from a daily 1-hr phone use, she
reached a daily level of 7- to 8-hr phone use. She feels a gradually growing pressure (“anxiety or some urge”) to use her mobile phone about
every 15 min, which constitutes withdrawal symptoms. She has not experienced relapse yet because she has not tried to stop or reduce her
cell phone usage. Finally, we will try to fit Anette’s symptoms to the gambling disorder criteria in the DSM-5 (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013, p. 585). One of the criteria cannot be adapted to smartphone usage: “After losing money gambling, often returns another
day to get even (chasing one’s losses),” because chasing losses is a behavior, which is a special characteristic of gamblers. The DSM-5
criteria of a gambling disorder are persistent and recurrent problematic behavior leading to clinically significant impairment or distress,
as indicated by the individual exhibiting four (or more) of the following in a 12-month period: Needs to use a mobile phone for increasing
amounts of time in order to achieve the desired excitement. – From a daily 1-hr phone use, Anette reached a daily level of 7- to 8-hr phone
use over 6 years. Is restless or irritable when attempting to cut down or stop smartphone usage. – Her stress and aggression level increases
when attempting to cut down or stop smartphone usage. Has made repeated unsuccessful efforts to control, cut back, or stop smartphone
usage.– Anette has not tried to reduce the time she spends on using her phone yet, but she thinks it would be necessary. Is often
preoccupied with smartphone use. – Anette always checks the Internet for new applications, prepares batteries to last all day, and searches
for information regarding new smartphone models. Often uses a smartphone when feeling distressed. – When Anette feels an increasing level of
stress or depression, she often uses her phone to reduce this. Lies to conceal the extent of involvement with smartphone use. – Anette often
lies to her mother about her smartphone use frequency. Has jeopardized or lost a significant relationship, job, or educational or career
opportunity because of mobile phone usage. – Due to mobile usage, her relationships with her peers have become shallower and many times she
avoids meetings to deal with her phone. Relies on others to provide money to relieve desperate financial situations caused by mobile phone
usage. – This criterion do not fit Anette because she does not use her phone for calls, but for other free functions and applications.
Anette fulfills almost all the criteria of the DSM-5 gambling disorder. As we have seen previously, Anette’s symptoms fit to Goodman’s
(1990) and Griffiths’s (2000) criteria of behavioral addictions and also fit to the criteria of addiction as described in the DSM-5, which
indicate that she may suffer from smartphone addiction. But before stating this, we must examine whether we could call Anette a mobile phone
addict or whether she is addicted to an application or some function, which is provided by the cell phone (e.g., addicted to social networks
or games). According to Anette, the average daily use is the following: at least 3–4 hr for social networking, 1.5 hr for surfing on the
Internet, 1 hr for watching movies or series (in the evenings), 1 hr for games, 0.5 hr for listening to music, and 1 hr for taking and
editing photos. The cumulative time of these activities results in a very high level of smartphone use. The most frequently used function
(3–4 hr of social networking) can be called average among 18-year-olds; however, the 1-hr-long photo editing is also associated with social
networking too, because she uploads the pictures there. Internet surfing may also be connected to social networking sites, because,
according to Anette, the content and information she has gathered are often shared with friends. The other activities are not classified as
social networking, but her mobile phone activity is organized mostly around community sites. We think that the social network addiction is a
better concept to describe Anette’s case than the cell phone addiction. The cell phone provides Anette unlimited availability in the case of
various behaviors. We can regard the mobile phone as a tool, which can be a source of addictions because of its mobility. Due to the mobile
phone, she is able to do these activities anywhere, for example, at a bus station, during lessons, or while having her meals. Availability
is a cardinal key in the inchoative stage of addictions, as it increases the probability of the development of addictive behavior.
Furthermore, there are believed to be some psychological problems besides her excessive mobile phone usage. The mild depression indicated by
the Beck Questionnaire (Beck, Steer, & Carbin, 1988) is debilitating, so for Anette it becomes very important to take part in social life,
which she accomplishes via her mobile phone, and her relationships are shallow. Her mother can be characterized by depressive symptoms, and
her father has made suicide attempts. The cell phone makes her feel relaxed; she feels that with the phone she is available and this way the
level of her anxiety decreases. Her negative emotions (anger and shame) are mainly related to her father. Breaking up with her boyfriends so
frequently is the repetition of her relationship with her father. She makes herself relive the original trauma and after the break-up she
expects the boy to look for her, just as she expects her father to do the same. She also has an ambivalent relationship with her mother; she
feels that her mother never understands her feelings. She uses her mobile phone as a compensation for the lack of satisfying relationships
in her life. Anette wants to be always available for her friends. This social aspect is not a characteristic of addictions, but it is
important that this availability occurs using social sites and not phone calls. Anette thinks that she would be abandoned by her friends if
she could give up her cell phone usage and therefore insists on constantly checking and using her smartphone. This cognitive distortion may
be one of the roots of her excessive smartphone usage and frequent community site visits (she said “without my phone I will be abandoned by
my friends”). On the other hand, this means that her feelings depend on the availability of the social sites, which are provided by the
smartphone. Presumably, the frequent use of a mobile phone is a coping mechanism for her, helping her to struggle with the anxiety deriving
from maladaptive thoughts. There is an inconsistency in Anette’s case; however, as we mentioned above, she often chooses her smartphone over
her friends but wants to be available for these same friends. The fear of intimacy and the repression of emotions dominate in her
relationships. She explains her cell phone addiction with the need to relate to people, but at the same time she also uses her mobile phone
excessively when she is in a group. In conclusion, she has a need for relationships, but her need for love is repressed and she compensates
for it with addiction. Preferring the Internet or smartphones over friends is a characteristic of technological addictions (see Demetrovics,
Szeredi, & Nyikos, 2004). In general, we think – based on Anette’s case – that there are other possible addictive behaviors (e.g., social
site addiction, video game addiction, and Internet addiction) behind most of the cases of excessive mobile phone use, and smartphones are
just tools that provide a high availability and accessibility of the object of the addiction (social sites, video games, or the Internet).
Our case report also supports Griffiths’s (2012) and Billieux’s (2012) suggestions that there may be more particular activities behind a
possible smartphone addiction which may be considered by researchers and clinical psychologists. During the therapy for cell phone
addiction, we are facing similar problems as in other addictions, such as the denial of the addiction. The most common defense mechanisms
are projection and repression, which are used to avoid facing the negative emotions involved. Leaving the therapy is also very common in the
case of patients who suffer from addictions. AK contributed to analysis and concept; RSZ contributed to analysis; ZB and BPV contributed to
concept. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
