Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)-type lymphoma is a relatively rare disease; nevertheless, it is the third most common lymphoma
type, accounting for 5–7% of all non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Case series and retrospective analysis published in the literature have suggested
that extra gastrointestinal (GI) MALT-type lymphoma can occur simultaneously with MALT-type lymphoma involving the GI tract. We report the
case of a healthy, 64-year-old Caucasian male who presented with progressive fatigue, non-productive cough, and worsening exertional
shortness of breath for 3 months who was subsequently diagnosed with gastric extra-nodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma or MALToma with
simultaneous metastasis to the lung (bronchi) based on biopsy reports. A 64-year-old Caucasian male presented to the emergency room
complaining of progressive fatigue for 3 months which had progressed to the point of hindering his usual activities of daily living (ADL).
He had recently visited his primary care provider for evaluation of a non-productive cough and exertional shortness of breath. A chest
radiography obtained at the time showed bilateral infiltrates. He was then treated for atypical pneumonia but his symptoms unfortunately did
not improve. Initial investigations in the emergency room revealed severe anemia and a positive stool guaiac test. Imaging showed bilateral
pulmonary infiltrates and an irregular gastric mass. Gastric and transbronchial biopsies were suggestive of extra-nodal marginal zone B-cell
lymphoma with simultaneous metastasis to the bronchi. He was treated symptomatically with transfusion of packed red blood cells (PRBC) and
intravenous iron followed by radiotherapy. Helicobacter pylori infection was ruled out eliminating the possibility of treating him with
eradication therapy. Although the stomach is the most common and most extensively studied site of involvement of MALT lymphomas, they can
also emerge in many other locations. MALT lymphomas have a high tendency to disseminate to other sites; therefore, extensive staging may be
necessary to look for suspicious lesions. Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma (MALT) belongs to a distinct group among non-Hodgkin
lymphomas (NHL) (1). It is the third most common lymphoma type accounting for 5-7% of all non- Hodgkin lymphomas (2). This was first
identified by Isaacson and Wright in 1983 (3). MALT lymphomas may be low or high grade, depending on their growth rate. MALT lymphoma
usually arises in a background of chronic antigenic stimulation triggered by persistent infections and/or autoimmune processes (4). The
majority of MALT lymphomas occur in the stomach, but they may affect any organ in the body including the intestines, salivary glands,
thyroid, lung, ocular adnexa and less frequently skin, urinary bladder, and gonads (5). Synchronous MALT lymphoma at different sites has
been reported in the literature. Dissemination can occur without overt clinical manifestations; therefore, thorough staging is recommended
to rule out multifocal involvement before initiation of therapy (6–8). We report a case of biopsy proven gastric MALT lymphoma with
synchronous dissemination to the lung. A 64-year-old Caucasian male presented to the emergency room complaining of progressive fatigue,
light-headedness, shortness of breath, and an intermittent cough. He reported waking up with extreme malaise and inability to ambulate on
the day of presentation. However, upon further questioning, it became evident that his symptoms had started 3 months prior and had gradually
progressed in severity. He had been on a camping trip in the Rocky Mountains of Colorado and stayed in a yurt for one and half months before
presentation; the trip was cut short due to his shortness of breath and decreased exercise tolerance. He had seen his primary care provider
for these symptoms and a chest X-ray showed bilateral upper and lower lobe alveolar infiltrates. He was treated for atypical pneumonia with
a 5-day course of azithromycin. His cough resolved but there was no improvement in the rest of his symptoms. Review of systems was
significant for unintentional weight loss of 8–10 pounds over a period of 2 years; he denied nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and/or melena. His
medical history included hypertension, glaucoma, and hyperlipidemia. He was a former smoker, having quit about 20 years prior. He drank
alcohol occasionally. Family history was significant for leukemia in his father. Physical examination was significant for pale skin and
conjunctiva and a 3/6 systolic murmur best heard at the left sternal border. Laboratory investigations showed hematocrit of 11.3% and
hemoglobin of 3.7 gm/dl, and the stool guaiac test was positive. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest with intravenous contrast showed
bilateral pulmonary opacities and mediastinal lymphadenopathy in the perivascular and posterior mediastinum (Fig. 1). CT of the abdomen and
pelvis with contrast showed severe gastric wall thickening involving the proximal body and fundus with surrounding inflammatory changes
(Fig. 2). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy with biopsy was performed. Gastric pathology showed an intense infiltrate of small, mature lymphocytes
extending to the epithelium and obliteration of normal glandular architecture; immune-histochemical staining showed CD20+ and abnormal dim
CD43 co-expression (Figs. 3 and 4) and BCL2+ and low to moderate Ki-67 proliferation index suggestive of extra-nodal marginal zone B-cell
lymphoma of mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue. Helicobacter pylori was not identified on immunohistochemical staining and a serological
analysis of IgG antibodies was negative ruling out previous exposure. A HLA-DQ pattern analysis for celiac disease was inconclusive.
Serological analysis to rule out chronic infective etiology for immune stimulation from blastomyces, coccidioides, histoplasma, legionella,
mycoplasma, aspergillus, and hepatitis B or C was negative. Subsequently, he also underwent bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsy of the
right upper and middle lobes, which showed atypical lymphoid infiltrate consistent with involvement from known MALT lymphoma with CD20+ and
dim CD43 co-expression (Figs. 5 and 6). He was treated symptomatically for anemia with blood transfusion and intravenous iron
administration. He underwent radiation therapy for MALT lymphoma of the stomach due to gastric bleeding and severe anemia requiring multiple
transfusions. Radiation treatment was given with 15 MV photons with an AP/PA treatment technique using MLC shaping with CT based three-
dimensional treatment and planning. He received a total dose of 36.0Gy in 20 fractions over 27 elapsed days. Immunotherapy with rituximab
was considered. However, since the only symptomatic manifestations were related to his severe anemia secondary to the gastric involvement of
his lymphoma, he was treated as localized disease. He is been closely followed by his oncologist and has been undergoing surveillance CT-
scan of his chest/abdomen every 6 months and yearly PET scan. He has not required any chemotherapy or further radiation therapy and his
lymphoma has remained stable. CT chest with contrast showing bilateral pulmonary opacities. CT abdomen and pelvis showing bowel wall
thickening. Gastric biopsy showing small lymphocytic infiltration with glandular involvement in the H&E stain. Positive immunohistochemistry
stains in the gastric biopsy. Transbronchial biopsy specimen showing lymphocytic Infiltration on H&E staining. Positive immunohistochemistry
stains in the transbronchial biopsy specimen. MALT-type lymphoma, also known as extra-nodal marginal type B-cell lymphoma, is an extra-nodal
lymphoma arising in a number of epithelial tissues including stomach, lung, salivary glands, skin, etc. (9). Previously it was also known as
‘pseudo-lymphoma’ due to its tendency to remain localized to the tissue of origin for a prolonged period of time; however, it is now
recognized as a clonal B-cell neoplasm that frequently recurs locally and has potential for systemic spread and transformation to a high
grade B-cell lymphoma. Extra-nodal marginal zone lymphoma of the lung is sometimes referred to as bronchial-associated lymphoid tissue
lymphoma (BALT lymphoma). It has been suggested that these lymphomas are the result of chronic immune stimulation, often due to bacterial,
viral, or autoimmune antigens; a good example is the well-known association between chronic gastritis due to Helicobacter pylori and the
development of gastric MALT lymphoma (10). It is postulated that these lymphomas arise from post-germinal center memory B cells with the
potential to differentiate into marginal zone cells or plasma cells. At least four different chromosomal translocations have been identified
in these lymphomas, namely t(14, 18), t(11, 18), t(1, 14), and t(3, 14) (11). Chronic immune stimulation has been thought to trigger an
interaction between antigens and receptors on the cell surface; this causes the B-cell lymphoma (BCL-10) protein to bind to the MALT
lymphoma–associated translocation (MALT1) protein which in turn activates a set of genes that promote survival of extra-nodal marginal zone
lymphoma cells (12). Although the stomach is the most commonly involved site, the evidence shows that MALT lymphomas can involve a variety
of organs like the lungs, breasts, thyroid, salivary glands, lacrimal glands, soft tissues, skin, etc. In a retrospective study of 35
patients with MALT lymphoma, 2 out of 24 patients were found to have multifocal disease with involvement of lung and colon, whereas 6 out of
11 patients with extra-gastric primary MALT lymphoma were found to have synchronous involvement of different anatomic sites (13). Another
case series of 140 patients with MALT lymphoma demonstrated multi-organ involvement in 25% of patients with gastric MALT and in 46% of
patients in non-gastric MALT (14). Due to these observations, it is recommended that patients newly diagnosed with MALT lymphoma undergo
extensive diagnostic staging prior to initiation of any therapy. Some of the routine investigation modalities outlined for staging include
ophthalmologic examination, otolaryngologic evaluation including sonogram of salivary glands or MRI if indicated. CT of the thorax and
abdomen, endoscopy with sonography of upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract and biopsies, and colonoscopy and bone marrow biopsy as indicated
should also be considered for staging purposes (13). A retrospective study conducted on 21 patients diagnosed with BALT lymphoma to identify
common imaging findings concluded that a single nodular or consolidative pattern was observed in 33%, multiple nodules or multiple areas of
consolidation was observed in 43%, bronchiectasis/bronchiolitis in 14%, and diffuse interstitial lung disease (DILD) was seen in 10% of the
patient population (15). This is a case of gastric MALT lymphoma with either synchronous or disseminated MALT lymphoma with involvement of
lung or BALT lymphoma; this patient had bilateral opacities seen on CT chest. These findings are consistent with those seen in previous
studies (16, 17). MALT lymphomas are not very common malignancies. Presentation varies widely depending on the involved organ(s), a
potential source of chronic immune stimulation may not always be apparent as evident in this case. Non-invasive Helicobacter pylori testing
as stool antigen or blood antibody test should be tested if Helicobacter pylori is negative by histopathology. MALT lymphomas were once
thought to be localized to one organ, but this concept has since been disproved; multiple case reports and case series have demonstrated its
multi-organ involvement at presentation or on subsequent staging. Therefore, thorough staging and diagnostic work up should be completed on
all newly diagnosed MALT lymphoma cases before initiation of any treatment. Written consent obtained from the patient and can be submitted
on request. Maria del Pilar Morales, M.D., F.A.C.P., Associate Program Director, Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Agnes Hospital
Center, Baltimore, MD, USA. BS, the principal author, and BK conceived the idea and critically reviewed the manuscript, whereas BS and AH
drafted the manuscript. All authors declare no conflicts of interest and funding relationships.
