A 66-year-old woman presented with abdominal discomfort. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a mass in the pancreas and multiple liver metastases.
Pathological examination confirmed the mass to be primary pancreatic cancer. Endoscopic insertion of a biliary stent was performed to
prevent common bile duct obstruction. Subsequently, she received combination chemotherapy, which resulted in a complete response. FDG-PET-CT
after chemotherapy revealed a high uptake of FDG along the outline of the biliary stent, with complete disappearance of both the primary and
metastatic tumors. A, A 66-year-old woman presented with abdominal discomfort. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass in
her pancreas, with multiple liver metastases. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy during endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography confirmed
primary pancreatic cancer. B, Endoscopic insertion of a metallic biliary stent was performed to prevent common bile duct obstruction.
Subsequently, she received 12 cycles of combination chemotherapy consisting of folic acid, bolus and continuous 5-fluorouracil, irinotecan,
and oxaliplatin (FOLFIRINOX),1 which resulted in a complete response. FDG-PET-CT after chemotherapy revealed a high uptake of FDG along the
outline of the biliary stent, with complete disappearance of both the primary and metastatic tumors. FDG-PET is useful for detecting
inflammatory biliary and pancreatic diseases, including cancer.2–4 Typically, FDG-PET-CT has a high sensitivity for detecting
cholangiocarcinoma or pancreatic diseases, including malignant neoplasm, and a negative scan indicates a nonmalignant state of disease, even
if there is the presence of a small tumor.2,4,5 However, in the case of nonmalignant disease—for example, autoimmune pancreatitis, including
IgG4-related autoimmune pancreatitis, and autoimmune cholangitis—it has been reported that FDG uptake was increased in diseased
regions.2,3,6 In the present case, the finding of a high FDG uptake clearly indicates the outline of the biliary stent without any evidence
of cancer involvement. Furthermore, cancer involvement was not shown pathologically after repeated endoscopic examinations.7 We suspect that
this radiological finding may be related to the endoscopic procedure of biliary stent insertion, the major cause being the focal
inflammation surrounding the metallic stent.8 The rate of complete remission (CR) among patients with advanced pancreatic cancer who are
treated with FOLFIRINOX is approximately 0.6%.1 In general, biliary tract cancer and pancreatic cancer have a poor prognosis and are thought
to be one of the most intractable malignant tumors. The reported rate of CR of advanced biliary tract cancer is only 2% of patients who are
treated with combined chemotherapy consisting of gemcitabine and oxaliplatin.9 We suggest that residual high uptake of FDG along the biliary
stent can be considered to be caused by local inflammation if the initial tumors have been cured by chemotherapy and complete remission has
been achieved. Physicians should be aware of this phenomenon because these findings make adequate diagnosis of these cancers difficult.
Detailed observation of the clinical course and repetition of the radiological and pathological examinations might help swift and correct
diagnosis. Conflicts of interest and sources of funding: none declared.
