Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors are extremely rare tumors in the spine; only 18 cases of extra-dural peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor cervical region have been reported. The aim of this report is to highlight the challenges in diagnosis and management
of this condition. We present a case of 5-year-old Moroccan boy, who presented with torticollis for 1 month. Computed tomography scan and
Magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical spine revealed an extradural, dumbbell-shaped mass with extra-spinal extension at the left C1–C6
level. Multiple biopsy specimens were obtained. Histological examination revealed a highly cellular neoplasm composed of diffuse sheets of
tumor cells having monomorphic, round to oval, finely vesicular nuclei. Immunohistochemical findings confirmed the diagnosis of intraspinal
peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor. After this illustrative case, we review the literature on clinicopathological and therapeutic
aspects. In practice, it is important to consider the diagnosis of peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor in children and adolescents
with an apparent soft-tissue mass located in the spine. Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) are heterogeneous group of malignant
neoplasms that occur mostly in childhood and early adulthood . These tumors can be classified as central PNETs (cPNET) or peripheral PNETs
(pPNET) depending on the site of presentation. Primary pPNETs of the spine are extremely rare. Extradural locations are even rarer . Due to
their low incidence, the available epidemiology is likely unreliable, and there are currently no standard clinical guidelines outlining
their management . Histologically, the PNET cells exhibit a primitive, poorly differentiated morphology with varying degrees of pleomorphism
and occasional evidence of neuroectodermal differentiation. The final diagnosis requires immunohistochemical analysis and cytogenetic
studies to identify (11;22) (q24;q12) translocation. In this paper we present an illustrative case of a primary extradural PNET of the
cervical spine, demonstrating clinical, pathological, and imaging characteristics of PNET of the spine; followed by a comprehensive review
of the literature. A 5-year-old Moroccan boy presented with a 2 months history of torticollis with radiation of the pain to the left upper
limb. The patient had no medical history. Physical examination revealed hypoesthesia of the upper limbs, evidence of bilateral lower
extremity weakness with motor power 4/5 in distal muscular group, and hypoactive reflexes in four extremities. There was no bowel or bladder
dysfunction. Cervical CT-scan and MR imaging demonstrated the presence of a 75 × 36 × 24 mm extradural mass, with extra-spinal extension at
the left C1–C6 level (Fig. 1). This dumbbell-shaped mass had heterogeneous signal intensity, calcifications and homogeneous intermediate
post-contrast enhancement following gadolinium administration.Fig. 1Sagittal T2 MRI showing an extradural mass observed at C1–C6 level
Sagittal T2 MRI showing an extradural mass observed at C1–C6 level No other cord lesion and no osseous abnormality of the spine were found.
A biopsy was done. Microscopic sections showed a highly cellular neoplasm composed of diffuse sheets of tumor cells having monomorphic,
round to oval, finely vesicular nuclei, occasional nucleoli, and scanty cytoplasm. Large areas of necrosis were seen (Fig. 2).
Immunohistochemical analysis showed positivity for CD99 (Fig. 3) and S-100 protein, and negativity for synaptophysin, chromogranin, desmin,
myogenin and CD56; favoring the diagnosis of PNET. After six courses of chemotherapy, cervical CT scan demonstrated complete regression of
the mass. Our patient has remained in remission at 8 months follow-up.Fig. 2Diffuse sheets of small, round, blue cells (HE)Fig. 3Tumor cells
show diffuse membranous positivity for CD-99 Diffuse sheets of small, round, blue cells (HE) Tumor cells show diffuse membranous positivity
for CD-99 Primitive neuroectodermal tumors are a group of malignant neoplasms, arising from pluripotent neural crest cells . Although PNET
is the second malignant neoplasm in childhood, the spinal cord, as primary site for pPNET, is relatively rare in all age groups, and
information concerning these tumors in the medical literature is limited to single case reports. Close to 107 cases of primary spinal PNET
have been reported in the literature with age ranging from 4 months to 70 years, but only 18 cases of extra-dural PNET in cervical region
have been reported (Table 1). In fact, the incidence of primary intraspinal PNET in lumbar region is twice as much as in thoracic and
cervical regions , and it has been reported to have an adult onset and a male predominance . Clinical presentation depends on the affected
site and the degree of tumor invasion, with no pathognomonic symptom . Few reports have investigated the imaging characteristics of PNET of
the spine . Diagnostic imaging studies should include computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), but radiographic
findings vary from patient to patient and are generally not helpful in differentiating PNET from other primary spinal . Definitive diagnosis
of PNET can only be made after tumor tissue is obtained from a limited biopsy or a radical resection specimen. Histological analysis alone
is not sufficient for diagnosis; immunohistochemistry is required . Microscopically, these tumors consist of small uniform round cells with
rounded nuclei, fine chromatin, and an eosinophilic scanty cytoplasm. The term “Ewing’s sarcoma” is reserved for undifferentiated
neuroectodermal tumors, while “PNET” is used for differentiated tumors with Homer Wright rosettes . Immunohistochemically, tumor cells are
positive for CD99 and HBA71, which are products of the MIC2 gene. Immunoreactivity for synaptophysin, NSE, S100 and neurofilament,
indicating neuroectodermal differentiation . Cytogenetic analysis detect the presence of a reciprocal translocation t (11;22) (q24;q12), it
is important to confirm the diagnosis in certain cases . The differential diagnosis includes central PNET, eosinophilic granuloma, malignant
meningioma, rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, and lymphoma [4, 6]. Due to the rarity of cases, specific guidelines in the management of
intraspinal PNET have not yet been devised. Surgery has been considered as the initial step in the management because patients may present
with neurologic deficit . In recent years, chemotherapy has been showing encouraging results for the treatment of Ppnet. An induction
chemotherapy tends to reduce the tumor size, as well as to control systemic disease, prior to any total excision of tumor [14, 20]. The
regimen includes multiple agents such as doxorubicin, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide, alternating with ifosfamide and etoposide.
Radiation therapy is commonly used as an adjuvant treatment for residual disease .Table 1Summary of the cases of extradural PNET in cervical
spine reported in the literatureAuthorsyearAge/sexLocation of tumorTreatmentKennedy et al. 200024 y/MC1–C5/extraduralSTR/RT/CTShin et al.
200138 y/MC5–C7/extraduralSTR/CTShin et al. 200122 y/FC7–T1/extraduralSTR/CTMukhopadhyay et al. 200129
y/FC3–C5/extraduralSTR/RT/CTMukhopadhyay et al. 200113 y/MC3–C5/extraduralSTR/RT/CTKogawa et al. 20047 y/FC2–C4/extraduralSTR/RT/CTOzturk et
al. 200718 y/MC6–T1/extraduralTTR/CTBozkurt et al. 200728 y/MC3–C5/extraduralTTR/RT/CTErkutlu et al. 20077 y/MC5–T1/extraduralTTR/RT/CTDuan
et al. 201014 y/MC2–C4/extraduralSTR/RT/CTSharafuddin et al. 199221 y/FC4–5 extraduralTTR/CTKumar et al. 200012 y/FC7–T4
extraduralBiopsy/RTIzycka–Swieszewska et al. 200113 y/FC7–T11 extraduralBiopsy/CT/RTMukhopadhyay et al. 200129 y/FC3–5
extraduralSTR/CT/RTMukhopadhyay et al. 200113 y/MC3–5 extraduralSTR/CT/RTVirani et al. 20025 y/MC7–T1 extraduralTTR/RTKumar et al. 20078
y/MC2–4 extraduralTTRGustavo et al. 201222y/FC1–C2 extraduralTTR/RT/CTOur present case20145y/MC1–C6Biopsy/CT/RT CT Chemotherapy, F Female, M
Male, RT Radiotherapy, STR Sub-total tumor resection, TTR Total tumor resection, y year Summary of the cases of extradural PNET in cervical
spine reported in the literature CT Chemotherapy, F Female, M Male, RT Radiotherapy, STR Sub-total tumor resection, TTR Total tumor
resection, y year Due to the aggressiveness of these tumors, the prognosis is still poor; disease-free survival is approximately 45 % at
7 years . Primary spinal extradural PNET is very rare and occurs predominantly in children and adolescents. Lacking clinical and
radiographic specificity, those tumors should be included in the differential diagnosis of extradural mass lesions. In order to confirm the
diagnosis, histopathology and immunohistochemistry analysis are mandatory. The presence of the t (11; 22) (q24, q12) chromosomal
translocation is supporting the diagnosis of pPNET. Due to limited evidence regarding the therapeutic aspects of these tumors, no definite
protocol can be formulated for their treatment, but resection, radiotherapy, and multipotent chemotherapy are the preferred treatment
options for these patients. Clinical outcomes still need to be evaluated in prospective trials. peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors
computerized tomography scan MK analyzed and interpreted the patient data, drafted the manuscript and made the figures. AM and ZA performed
the histological examination, proposed the study, supervised MK and revised the manuscript. NL and LR have made substantial contributions to
analysis and interpretation of patient data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. None. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardian for publication of this Case Report and any
accompanying images.
