Proteinuria is a manifestation of renal dysfunction and it has been demonstrated to be a significant prognostic factor in various clinical
situations. The study was designed to analyze prognosis of patients receiving liver transplantation as well as to determine predictive
performance of perioperative proteinuria. We retrospectively reviewed data of patients who had received a liver transplant in a medical
center between 2002 and 2010. Demographic information and clinical characteristic parameters were recorded on the day of intensive care unit
admission before operation and on postoperative days 1, 7, and 14. Among a total of 323 patients, in-hospital mortality and 90-day mortality
rates were 13.0 % (42/323) and 14.2 % (46/323), respectively. Patients with proteinuria on admission had higher rates of acute kidney injury
(26.8 % vs. 8.8 %, p < 0.001), severe infection episodes (48.8 % vs. 30.7 %, p = 0.023), hospital death (31.1 % vs. 10.1 %, p < 0.001), and
90-day mortality (37.7 % vs. 10.9 %, p < 0.001). Multivariate analysis showed that proteinuria on admission and Sequential Organ Failure
Assessment (SOFA) score were independent predictors of in-hospital mortality. The discriminatory ability of proteinuria plus SOFA was even
better than that of SOFA alone, especially on postoperative day 1. The presence of proteinuria before liver transplantation is supposed to
be recognized as a negative predictor for in-hospital survival. Moreover, the presence of proteinuria after liver transplantation can assist
in the early prediction of poor short-term prognosis for patients receiving liver transplantation. Proteinuria has been suggested to be a
predictive factor and an important tool for differentiating the etiology of renal dysfunction in various clinical scenarios [1, 2]. The good
predictive performance of preoperative proteinuria utilized for the development of renal failure after operation has been reported . Lin et
al. also demonstrated that the presence of proteinuria in patients with end-stage liver disease is associated with increased risk of
intensive care unit (ICU) mortality and poor short-term outcome . In the literature, prognostic significance of several scoring systems for
end-stage liver disease has been validated . Wong and colleagues further compared the predictive accuracy of the commonly used scores in 149
end-stage liver disease patients undergone liver transplantation. The Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) system was found to be
superior to Child-Pugh points (CP points) and Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score, and postoperative day 7 SOFA had the best
discriminative power for predicting 3-month and 1-year mortality after liver transplantation . Renal dysfunction is one of the most
significant adverse events in patients awaiting or undergoing a liver transplant, and its occurrence generally indicates a high rate of poor
prognosis [9, 10]. Prediction of acute kidney injury (AKI) is important for clinical decision making. Numerous researches have demonstrated
that the presence of proteinuria provides a clue to the structural impairment of the kidney and reflects increased risk of developing AKI in
general population [11, 12]. In spite of the fact that proteinuria has been increasingly considered as a significant manifestation of acute
or chronic renal disease , no study clarify the association between presence of proteinuria and prognosis of patients undergoing liver
transplant. This study aims to assess proteinuria as an early marker of renal dysfunction for liver transplant as well as to compare the
outcome prediction efficacy of proteinuria with that of the main scores in the setting of liver transplant. This research was performed from
October 2002 to December 2010 in a 2000-bed medical center in Taiwan. A total of 323 patients with end-stage liver disease and acute liver
failure received liver transplant were included. Patients less than 18 years of age, patients who had previously received liver transplant,
and patients with end-stage renal disease were excluded. We retrospectively reviewed following data: demographic information, aetiologies of
primary liver disease, clinical parameters, donor type, anesthesia time, operation time, duration of hospitalization and ICU stay, and
outcome. Illness severity was evaluated on the day of ICU admission before operation and on postoperative day 1, 7, and 14. The primary
outcome of this research was in-hospital mortality rate. Follow-up at 90-day after transplantation was performed by chart records review or
telephone interview . Urine dipstick analysis was used to detect proteinuria. The results were graded as negative (less than 15 mg/dL),
trace (15 to 30 mg/dL), 1+ (30 to 100 mg/dL), 2+ (100 to 300 mg/dL), 3+ (300 to 1000 mg/dL) or 4+ (more than 1000 mg/dL). In this study,
proteinuria was defined as presence (urine dipstick reading trace, or ≥ 1+) or absence (negative urine dipstick reading). The urinary
analysis was performed on ICU admission and postoperative days 1, 7, and 14 . Severity of liver disease was assessed by CP points and MELD
score [14, 15]. Severity of illness was also graded by SOFA score according to the six organ systems. AKI was diagnosed according to
definition of the RIFLE criteria (Table 1). The RIFLE classification was also used to classify patients into risk (RIFLE-R), injury
(RIFLE-I), and failure (RIFLE-F) groups . No patient met the criteria for classification of loss of kidney function (RIFLE-L) or end-stage
renal disease (RIFLE-E). The following simple model for mortality was constructed: non–acute kidney injury (0 points), RIFLE-R (1 point),
RIFLE-I (2 points), and RIFLE-F (3 points) . The worst values measured on the day of ICU admission and postoperative days 1, 7, and 14 were
recorded.Table 1The criteria of SOFA score and RIFLE classificationSOFA Score01234Respiration PaO2/FiO2>400>300–≤ 400>200–≤ 300>100–≤ 200
with ventilator≤100 with ventilatorCoagulation Platelets, ×103/mm3 >150>100–≤ 150>50–≤ 100>20–≤ 50≤20Liver Bilirubin, mg/dL (μmol/L)<1.2
(<20)≥1.2–< 2.0 (20–32)≥2.0–< 6.0 (33–101)≥6.0–< 12.0 (102–204)≥12.0 (>204)Cardiovascular HypotensionMAP ≥ 70 mm HgMAP <70 mm HgDopamine ≤5
or dobutamine (any dose)a Dopamine >5 or epi ≤0.1 or norepi ≤0.1a Dopamine >15 or epi >0.1 or norepi >0.1a CNS Glasgow Coma
Score1513–1410–126–9<6Renal Creatinine, mg/dL (μmol/L) or urine output<1.2 (<110)≥1.2–< 2.0 (110–170)≥2.0–< 3.5 (171–299)≥3.5–< 5.0
(300–440) or <500 mL/day≥5.0 (>440) or <200 mL/dayRIFLE ClassificationSCr criteriaUO CriteriaDefinitionSCr changes over 1–7 days, sustained
for more than 24 hUO < 0.5 ml/kg/h × 6 h RiskIncrease in SCr ≥ 1.5 × baseline or decrease in GFR ≥ 25 %UO < 0.5 ml/kg/h × 6 h InjuryIncrease
in SCr ≥ 2.0 × baseline or decrease in GFR ≥ 50 %UO < 0.5 ml/kg/h × 12 h FailureIncrease in SCr ≥ 3.0 × baseline or an absolute serum
creatinine ≥ 4.0 mg/dl with an acute rise of at least 0.5 mg/dl or decrease in GFR ≥ 75 %UO < 0.5 ml/kg/h × 24 h or
anuria × 12 h LossComplete loss of kidney function > 4 weeks ESRDEnd-stage renal disease (>3 months) aAbbreviations: SOFA the sequential
organ failure assessment, RIFLE risk of renal failure, injury to kidney, failure of kidney function, loss of kidney function, and end-stage
renal failure, SCr serum creatinine, UO urine output, hrs hours, ESRD end-stage renal disease, RRT renal replacement therapy The criteria of
SOFA score and RIFLE classification aAbbreviations: SOFA the sequential organ failure assessment, RIFLE risk of renal failure, injury to
kidney, failure of kidney function, loss of kidney function, and end-stage renal failure, SCr serum creatinine, UO urine output, hrs hours,
ESRD end-stage renal disease, RRT renal replacement therapy Data analyses were performed using the statistical package SPSS 19.0 (SPSS,
Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). All statistical tests are 2-tailed. A p- value of <0.05 is considered to represent statistical significance.
Continuous variables were presented as means and standard derivations, and categorical data were summarized as frequency and percentage
unless otherwise stated. Hospital survivors were compared with nonsurvivors in the primary analysis. Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was employed
for testing normal distribution. Normally distributed continuous variables were compared by Student’s t-test and non-normally distributed
ones were compared by Mann–Whitney U test. Categorical data were tested by the chi-square test. The risk factors for in-hospital mortality
were assessed by univariate analysis, and statistically significant variables were included in the multivariate analysis. For analyzing
these variables, backward multiple logistic regression model was employed. Hosmer–Lemeshow goodness-of-fit test was used to examined
calibration and compare the number of predicted and observed mortality. Discrimination in predicting 90-day mortality was assessed by area
under the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) curve. Nonparametric approach was used to compare the AUROC values. Analyses of the ROC
curves were applied for calculating sensitivity, specificity, and overall correctness. The cutoff value was decided according to the ability
to offer the highest Youden index . Cumulative survival curves were plotted using the Kaplan-Meier method and compared by the log rank test.
Correlation of proteinuria and serum creatinine (SCr) measured on ICU admission was measured by Pearson analysis and linear regression. The
prevalence of proteinuria before operation, and on postoperative day 1, 7, and 14 were compared between 90-day survivors and nonsurvivors by
repeated-measures analysis of variance using the general linear model procedure. Three hundred and twenty-three patients who received liver
transplant from October 2002 to December 2010 were enrolled. Overall in-hospital mortality rate was 13.0 % (42/323). Table 2 listed patient
data and clinical characteristics of both survivors and non-survivors. Mean patient age was 51 years; 231 were male (71 %) and 92 were
female (29 %). Ninety-one patients (28.2 %) received deceased-donor grafts. Mean length of ICU stay was 21 days. There was no significant
difference in age or gender between survivors and non-survivors. Table 3 listed primary liver diseases and presumptive causes of AKI on the
first day after transplantation. In this research, hepatitis B virus infection (34 %) was the leading cause of liver diseases, followed by
hepatitis B virus infection with hepatoma (15 %). Patient who developed AKI tended to attribute to multiple reasons (23 %), followed by
infection (13 %).Table 2Patient demographic data and clinical characteristics according to in-hospital mortalityAll patients
(n = 323)Survivors (n = 281)Non-survivors (n = 42) P-valueAge (years)50.8 ± 10.450.9 ± 9.850.3 ± 13.8NS (0.753)Gender
(M/F)231/92199/8232/10NS (0.583)BMI on admission (kg/m2)24.3 ± 4.024.7 ± 4.021.1 ± 2.4 <0.001 History of diabetes mellitus
(yes/no)55/26846/2359/33NS (0.387)History of chronic kidney disease (yes/no)31/29222/2599/33 0.005 Proteinuria on admission
(yes/no)45/27831/25014/28 <0.001 Hemoglobin on admission (g/dL)10.6 ± 2.210.7 ± 2.29.8 ± 2.1 0.008 Leukocytes on admission (×
109/L)2.9 ± 3.72.8 ± 3.53.3 ± 4.9NS (0.569)Platelets on admission (× 109/L) 72.7 72.9 ± 71.1 NS (0.809)Prothrombin time INR on
admission1.8 ± 0.71.8 ± 0.71.9 ± 0.7NS (0.050)Serum sodium on admission (mmol/L)137.8 ± 5.7137.9 ± 5.4137.0 ± 8.0NS (0.471)AST on admission
(U/L) 88.8 87.5 98.3 NS (0.498)ALT on admission (U/L) 67.2 67.4 65.8 NS (0.938)Total bilirubin on admission (μmol/L) 145.4 130.0 244.5 0.003
A-a gradient on admission (mmHg) 25.1 22.8 43.3 0.039 Serum creatinine on admission (μmol/L) 97.2 92.2 114.9 NS (0.064)Hepatorenal syndrome,
n (%)29 (9)22 (8)7 (17)NS (0.079)MAP on admission (mmHg)86.1 ± 12.486.3 ± 12.784.7 ± 10.3NS (0.427)Child-Pugh points on
admission10.1 ± 2.69.9 ± 2.711.1 ± 2.0 0.010 MELD score on admission17.6 ± 9.017.1 ± 8.921.4 ± 9.7 0.025 RIFLE on admission (No
AKI/Risk/Injury/Failure)286/16/9/12250/13/9/936/3/0/3NS (0.449)SOFA score on admission5.1 ± 2.74.8 ± 2.56.7 ± 3.3 0.001 Anesthesia time
during operation (hours)12.1 ± 1.812.1 ± 1.912.4 ± 1.5NS (0.362)Donor type (DDLT /LDLT)91/23274/20717/25 0.018 Total operative time (mins)
687.1 685.6 697.2 NS (0.589)Cold ischemia time (mins) 85.0 74.8 166.4 NS (0.125)Warm ischemia time (mins) 128.2 126.3 141.1 NS (0.115)Graft-
to-recipient weight ratio (%)1.0 ± 0.31.0 ± 0.31.1 ± 0.5NS (0.125)Blood loss volume during operation (ml) 3034 2672 4430 0.014 Length of ICU
stay (days) 21.0 19.2 33.6 0.002 Length of hospital stay (days) 47.8 46.7 54.7 NS (0.215)Values in bold are statistically significant
(P-value < 0.05)There were significant differences in BMI on admission, history of chronic kidney disease, presence of proteinuria on
admission, hemoglobin on admission, total bilirubin on admission, A-a gradient on admission, Child-Pugh points on admission, MELD score on
admission, SOFA score on admission, blood loss volume during operation, and length of ICU stayAbbreviation: M male, F female, ICU intensive
care unit, MAP mean arterial pressure, INR international normalized ratio, AST aspartate aminotransferase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, DM
diabetes mellitus, MELD model for end-stage liver disease, SOFA sequential organ failure assessment, AKI acute kidney injury, DDLT deceased
donor liver transplantation, LDLT living donor liver transplantationTable 3Primary liver diseases and presumptive causes of AKI after
operation according to in-hospital mortalityAll patientsSurvivorsNon-survivors P-value n = 323 n = 281 n = 42Primary liver disease323
(100)281 (100)42 (100) Alcoholic, n (%)16 (5)12 (4)4 (10)NS (0.254) Hepatitis B, n (%)111 (34)100 (36)11 (26)NS (0.848) Hepatitis C, n (%)31
(10)23 (8)8 (19) 0.003 Hepatoma, n (%)3 (1)3 (1)0 (0)NS (1.000) Alcoholic + hepatitis B, n (%)21 (6)15 (7)2 (5)NS
(1.000) Alcoholic + hepatitis C, n (%)5 (2)5 (2)0 (0)NS (1.000) Alcoholic + hepatoma, n (%)3 (1)3 (1)0 (0)NS (1.000) Hepatitis B + hepatitis
C, n (%)17 (5)14 (5)3 (7)NS (0.723) Hepatitis B + hepatoma, n (%)49 (15)43 (15)6 (14)NS (0.172) Hepatitis C + hepatoma, n (%)31 (10)29 (10)2
(5)NS (0.134) Alcoholic + hepatitis B + hepatoma, n (%)2 (1)1 (1)1 (2)NS (0.429) Other causes, n (%)a 34 (10)29 (10)5 (12)NS (0.787)Presence
of AKI after transplantation (Post-OP day1)125 (39)101 (36)24 (57) 0.011 Prerenal type of AKI, n (%)2 (1)2 (1)0 (0)NS (1.000) Infection
related AKI, n (%)42 (13)31 (11)11 (26) 0.006 Nephrotoxic agent exposure related AKI, n (%)6 (2)6 (2)0 (0)NS (0.601) Mixed type and other
causes of AKI, n (%)b 75 (23)62 (22)13 (31)NS (0.236)Values in bold are statistically significant (P-value < 0.05)Hepatitis C virus
infection was independently associated with in-hospital mortalityPresence of infection related AKI on the first day after transplantation
was independently associated with in-hospital mortality aBiliary cirrhosis, biliary sclerosis, autoimmune hepatitis, Wilson’s disease,
polycystic liver disease, drugs, and unknown causes bMultifactor related, ischemia/reperfusion injury, or unknown cause Patient demographic
data and clinical characteristics according to in-hospital mortality Values in bold are statistically significant (P-value < 0.05) There
were significant differences in BMI on admission, history of chronic kidney disease, presence of proteinuria on admission, hemoglobin on
admission, total bilirubin on admission, A-a gradient on admission, Child-Pugh points on admission, MELD score on admission, SOFA score on
admission, blood loss volume during operation, and length of ICU stay Abbreviation: M male, F female, ICU intensive care unit, MAP mean
arterial pressure, INR international normalized ratio, AST aspartate aminotransferase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, DM diabetes mellitus,
MELD model for end-stage liver disease, SOFA sequential organ failure assessment, AKI acute kidney injury, DDLT deceased donor liver
transplantation, LDLT living donor liver transplantation Primary liver diseases and presumptive causes of AKI after operation according to
in-hospital mortality Values in bold are statistically significant (P-value < 0.05) Hepatitis C virus infection was independently associated
with in-hospital mortality Presence of infection related AKI on the first day after transplantation was independently associated with in-
hospital mortality aBiliary cirrhosis, biliary sclerosis, autoimmune hepatitis, Wilson’s disease, polycystic liver disease, drugs, and
unknown causes bMultifactor related, ischemia/reperfusion injury, or unknown cause Table 4 listed the correlation of operation time and
newly onset proteinuria after transplantation. Among patients who received deceased-donor grafts, those with newly onset proteinuria tended
to have longer cold ischemia time. While in patients who received living-donor grafts, those with newly onset proteinuria tended to have
longer warm ischemia time.Table 4Operation time according to newly onset proteinuria after transplantationPatients with no proteinuria on
admissionPatients with newly onset proteinuria on post-OP day 1Patients with no newly onset proteinuria on post-OP day 1 P-valueLDLT n = 208
n = 65 (31.2 %) n = 143 (68.8 %) Total operative time (mins) 703.9 789.3 707.6 NS (0.087) Cold ischemia time (mins) 85.4 27.9 21.9 NS
(0.659) Warm ischemia time (mins) 128.2 194.0 127.6 0.004 DDLT n = 70 n = 47 (67.1 %) n = 23 (32.9 %) Total operative time (mins) 640.0
646.2 625.8 NS (0.876) Cold ischemia time (mins) 651.3 756.5 552.0 0.039 Warm ischemia time (mins) 113.5 114.0 101.4 NS (0.737)Values in
bold are statistically significant (P-value < 0.05)In the LDLT group, patients with newly onset proteinuria had significantly longer warm
ischemia timeIn the DDLT group, patients with newly onset proteinuria had significantly longer cold ischemia timeAbbreviation: DDLT deceased
donor liver transplantation, LDLT living donor liver transplantation Operation time according to newly onset proteinuria after
transplantation Values in bold are statistically significant (P-value < 0.05) In the LDLT group, patients with newly onset proteinuria had
significantly longer warm ischemia time In the DDLT group, patients with newly onset proteinuria had significantly longer cold ischemia time
Abbreviation: DDLT deceased donor liver transplantation, LDLT living donor liver transplantation The univariate analysis showed that 9
(Table 5) out of the 31 variables (Table 2) were good prognostic indicators for in-hospital mortality. On performing the multivariate
analysis, we recognized presence of proteinuria and SOFA determined on the first day of ICU admission as having independent prognostic
significance (Table 5). Regression coefficients of these variables were used to calculate the odds of death in each patient as follows:Table
5Variables showing prognostic significance for in-hospital mortalityParametersBeta CoefficientStandard errorOdds ratios (95 % CI)
P-valueUnivariate logistic regression BMI on admission (kg/m2)−0.2470.0500.781 (0.708–0.861) <0.001 History of chronic kidney
disease1.1670.4373.211 (1.364–7.557) 0.008 Proteinuria on admission1.4800.3984.391 (2.011–9.587) <0.001 Hemoglobin on admission
(g/dL)−0.2180.0830.804 (0.683–0.947) 0.009 Total bilirubin on admission (mg/dL)0.0370.0111.038 (1.015–1.061) 0.001 Donor type (DDLT
/LDLT)−0.410.1690.664 (0.477–0.925) 0.015 A-a gradient on admission0.0090.0031.009 (1.002–1.016) 0.007 Child-Pugh points on
admission0.1760.0701.193 (1.040–1.368) 0.012 MELD score on admission0.0460.0561.047 (0.999–1.098)NS (0.056) SOFA score on
admission0.2190.0571.245 (1.114–1.391) <0.001 Blood loss volume during operation (ml)<0.001<0.0011.000 (1.000–1.000) 0.003 Length of ICU
stay (days)0.0180.0061.018 (1.007–1.029) 0.002 Multivariate logistic regression Proteinuria on admission1.3200.4783.745 (1.468–9.554) 0.006
SOFA on admission0.1570.0671.170 (1.027–1.333) 0.019 Constant−2.4710.2450.085 <0.001 On performing multivariate logistic regression, the
presence of proteinuria on admission and SOFA score on admission had independent prognostic significance for assessing in-hospital
mortalityAbbreviation: MELD model for end-stage liver disease, SOFA sequential organ failure assessment Variables showing prognostic
significance for in-hospital mortality On performing multivariate logistic regression, the presence of proteinuria on admission and SOFA
score on admission had independent prognostic significance for assessing in-hospital mortality Abbreviation: MELD model for end-stage liver
disease, SOFA sequential organ failure assessment Logarithm of odds of death = −2.471 + 1.320 × Proteinuria + 0.157 × SOFA score. Table 6
showed values of calibration and discrimination of proteinuria, CP points, MELD, RIFLE, and SOFA in predicting 90-day mortality. For
assessing calibration, the number of observed and predicted mortality was compared by Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness-of-fit. Discriminatory power
was assessed by AUROC. On basis of the ROC analysis, discriminatory ability of SOFA and MELD determined on preoperative, postoperative days
1, 7, and 14 were better than that of CP points and proteinuria.Table 6Calibration and discrimination for the scoring methods used in
predicting 90-day mortalityCalibrationDiscriminationGoodness-of-fit (x2)df p AUROC ± SE95 % CI P On admission Proteinuria---
0.582 ± 0.0530.479–0.685NS (0.100) Child-Pugh points10.15770.1800.580 ± 0.0410.499–0.662NS (0.087) MELD
score5.84580.6650.609 ± 0.0670.418–0.680NS (0.067) RIFLE───0.577 ± 0.0670.355–0.618NS (0.845) SOFA1.61850.8990.648 ± 0.0490.552–0.745 0.002
Proteinuria plus SOFA1.04750.9590.659 ± 0.0520.557–0.761 0.002 Proteinuria plus nonrenal SOFA6.34760.3850.658 ± 0.0550.550–0.765 0.002
Postoperative day 1 Proteinuria---0.609 ± 0.0900.432–0.786NS (0.240) Child-Pugh points2.43850.7860.639 ± 0.0620.479–0.721NS (0.142) MELD
score5.94780.6530.705 ± 0.0440.620–0.791 <0.001 RIFLE2.68420.2610.626 ± 0.0480.531–0.720 0.007 SOFA3.06380.9300.761 ± 0.0430.676–0.845
<0.001 Proteinuria plus SOFA7.40660.2850.828 ± 0.0620.707–0.949 <0.001 Proteinuria plus nonrenal SOFA11.59550.0410.823 ± 0.0780.670–0.977
0.001 Postoperative day 7 Proteinuria---0.757 ± 0.0560.647–0.866 <0.001 Child-Pugh points6.36540.1730.750 ± 0.0650.593–0.847 0.001 MELD
score26.16180.0010.856 ± 0.0380.782–0.930 <0.001 RIFLE9.60220.0080.825 ± 0.0420.742–0.908 <0.001 SOFA6.07360.4150.899 ± 0.0310.838–0.961
<0.001 Proteinuria plus SOFA8.62560.1960.907 ± 0.0410.825–0.988 <0.001 Proteinuria plus nonrenal SOFA7.85660.2490.903 ± 0.0380.828–0.978
<0.001 Postoperative day 14 Proteinuria---0.773 ± 0.0670.642–0.904 0.005 Child-Pugh points3.46930.3250.783 ± 0.0520.682–0.885 <0.001 MELD
score134.848<0.0010.850 ± 0.0560.740–0.960 <0.001 RIFLE1.65820.4360.780 ± 0.0500.681–0.879 <0.001 SOFA24.49570.0010.892 ± 0.0440.806–0.978
<0.001 Proteinuria plus SOFA3.98770.7810.900 ± 0.0420.819–0.982 <0.001 Proteinuria plus nonrenal SOFA5.00970.6590.894 ± 0.0380.819–0.969
<0.001 Values in bold are statistically significant (P-value < 0.05)On ICU admission day (before transplantation): The prediction accuracy
of the SOFA score was better than those of the Child-Pugh points, MELD score and RIFLE. The proteinuria plus SOFA score has an even better
discriminatory power than the SOFA scoreOn post-transplant day 1, 7, 14: The prediction accuracy of the SOFA and MELD score was better than
that of the Child-Pugh points. The proteinuria plus SOFA score has an even better discriminatory power than the SOFA scoreAbbreviation:
MELD, model for end-stage liver disease; SOFA, sequential organ failure assessment; df, degree of freedom; AUROC, areas under the receiver
operating characteristic curve; SE, standard error; CI, confidence intervals; NS, not significant Calibration and discrimination for the
scoring methods used in predicting 90-day mortality Values in bold are statistically significant (P-value < 0.05) On ICU admission day
(before transplantation): The prediction accuracy of the SOFA score was better than those of the Child-Pugh points, MELD score and RIFLE.
The proteinuria plus SOFA score has an even better discriminatory power than the SOFA score On post-transplant day 1, 7, 14: The prediction
accuracy of the SOFA and MELD score was better than that of the Child-Pugh points. The proteinuria plus SOFA score has an even better
discriminatory power than the SOFA score Abbreviation: MELD, model for end-stage liver disease; SOFA, sequential organ failure assessment;
df, degree of freedom; AUROC, areas under the receiver operating characteristic curve; SE, standard error; CI, confidence intervals; NS, not
significant The proteinuria plus SOFA score [following variables were applied for the calculation: presence of proteinuria (1 point) and
SOFA] was defined as the addition of the two variables, with sum ranging from 0 to 25 . The discriminatory ability of this score seemed to
be superior to that of other evaluating systems, including proteinuria, CP points, MELD, RIFLE, SOFA, and proteinuria plus nonrenal SOFA
scores. AUROC curves were highest for proteinuria plus SOFA on postoperative day 7 to predict 90-day mortality (0.907 ± 0.041). AUROC value
for proteinuria plus SOFA determined on postoperative day 1 was significantly higher than that for proteinuria, RIFLE, CP points, and MELD.
AUROC for proteinuria plus SOFA determined on postoperative day 7 and 14 were significantly higher than that for proteinuria, RIFLE, and CP
points. For evaluation and validation of the scoring systems, we compared the sensitivity, specificity, and overall correctness of
prediction at cut-off values which could offer the highest Youden index (Table 7). At preoperative, postoperative days 1, 7, and 14, The
proteinuria plus SOFA had the best Youden index and overall correctness in predicting 90-day mortalityTable 7Prediction of subsequent 90-day
mortalityPredictive factorsCutoff pointYouden indexSensitivity (%)Specificity (%)Overall correctness (%)Proteinuria On
admissionpositive0.16288858 Postoperative day 1positive0.22645861 Postoperative day 7positive0.51856676 Postoperative day
14positive0.55906577Child-Pugh points On admission120.17952259 Postoperative day 1100.26903764 Postoperative day 790.42608271 Postoperative
day 1480.42509271MELD score On admission150.19655661 Postoperative day 1220.27607166 Postoperative day 7200.58698778 Postoperative day
14230.62758781RIFLE On admissionI category0.0479752 Postoperative day 1I category0.20576461 Postoperative day 7I
category0.56728277 Postoperative day 14R category0.60748278SOFA On admission50.23527162 Postoperative day 1110.41776471 Postoperative day
770.70838784 Postoperative day 1470.69858484Proteinuria plus SOFA On admission50.26577063 Postoperative day 1120.54797577 Postoperative day
780.72858585 Postoperative day 1480.72898386Proteinuria plus nonrenal SOFA On admission50.26547663 Postoperative day
1120.545410077 Postoperative day 780.68868284 Postoperative day 1470.671006784Optimal cutoff points for predicting 3-month mortality were
derived from receiver operator characteristic analysis. On admission (pre-transplant), post-transplant day 1, 7, and 14, the Youden index
and overall correctness for predicting 3-month mortality were higher for the proteinuria plus SOFA score than those for the proteinuria,
Child-Pugh points, MELD score, RIFLE criteria, SOFA, and proteinuria plus nonrenal SOFA scoresAbbreviation: MELD model for end-stage liver
disease, SOFA sequential organ failure assessment Prediction of subsequent 90-day mortality Optimal cutoff points for predicting 3-month
mortality were derived from receiver operator characteristic analysis. On admission (pre-transplant), post-transplant day 1, 7, and 14, the
Youden index and overall correctness for predicting 3-month mortality were higher for the proteinuria plus SOFA score than those for the
proteinuria, Child-Pugh points, MELD score, RIFLE criteria, SOFA, and proteinuria plus nonrenal SOFA scores Abbreviation: MELD model for
end-stage liver disease, SOFA sequential organ failure assessment In this study population, 45 patients had proteinuria while 278 patients
had no proteinuria on ICU admission. Patients with proteinuria on admission had higher incidence of AKI (26.8 % vs. 8.8 %, p < 0.001),
severe infection episodes requiring prolonged courses of antibiotics or inotropic agents (48.8 % vs. 30.7 %, p = 0.023), hospital death
(31.1 % vs. 10.1 %, p < 0.001), and 90-day mortality (37.7 % vs. 10.9 %, p < 0.001) than those without proteinuria. Figure 1 illuminates the
significantly different cumulative survival rates between patients with and without proteinuria as well as the similar cumulative survival
rates between patients with and without SCr level elevation (Increase in SCr ≥ 1.5 × baseline) on ICU admission (before transplantation).
Fig. 2 shows the weak correlation of proteinuria and SCr measured on ICU admission (P = 0.143). Fig. 3 illustrates significant increases in
the prevalence of proteinuria during the time (starting before transplantation to 14 days postoperatively) among hospital and 90-day
mortality groups but not survival groups.Fig. 1Survival Functions Kaplan-Meier survival analysis in 323 patients according to the data
measured before receiving liver transplantation. a Cumulative survival rates differed significantly for patients with proteinuria (n = 45)
and those without proteinuria (n = 278) on the first day of ICU admission. b Cumulative survival rates did not differ significantly for
patients with SCr level elevation (Increase in SCr ≥ 1.5 × baseline) (n = 28) and those without SCr elevation (n = 295) on the first day of
ICU admission. *Abbreviation: SCr, serum creatinineFig. 2Correlations of proteinuria and SCr measured on the first day of ICU admission for
in-hospital mortality. The proteinuria is not correlated significantly (p = 0.143) with SCr. *Abbreviation: SCr, serum creatinineFig. 3The
prevalence of proteinuria for the (a) in-hospital survival group (living, n = 281) and mortality group (dead, n = 42) and (b) 90-day
survival group (living, n = 277) and mortality group (dead, n = 46) during the ICU admission day and postoperative days 1, 7, and 14. The
prevalence of proteinuria significantly increased during this period among the in-hospital and 90-day mortality groups but not in the
survivor groups (* P < 0.05) Survival Functions Kaplan-Meier survival analysis in 323 patients according to the data measured before
receiving liver transplantation. a Cumulative survival rates differed significantly for patients with proteinuria (n = 45) and those without
proteinuria (n = 278) on the first day of ICU admission. b Cumulative survival rates did not differ significantly for patients with SCr
level elevation (Increase in SCr ≥ 1.5 × baseline) (n = 28) and those without SCr elevation (n = 295) on the first day of ICU admission.
*Abbreviation: SCr, serum creatinine Correlations of proteinuria and SCr measured on the first day of ICU admission for in-hospital
mortality. The proteinuria is not correlated significantly (p = 0.143) with SCr. *Abbreviation: SCr, serum creatinine The prevalence of
proteinuria for the (a) in-hospital survival group (living, n = 281) and mortality group (dead, n = 42) and (b) 90-day survival group
(living, n = 277) and mortality group (dead, n = 46) during the ICU admission day and postoperative days 1, 7, and 14. The prevalence of
proteinuria significantly increased during this period among the in-hospital and 90-day mortality groups but not in the survivor groups (*
P < 0.05) In the current research, overall hospital survival rate was 87.0 % (281/323), which is in agreement with what had been presented
in the literature [8, 18, 19]. Our investigation found that both presence of proteinuria and SOFA score determined on the first day of
admission to the ICU were significantly correlated to in-hospital mortality (Tables 2 and 5). Analytical results also proved that
discriminatory ability of SOFA was better than those of CP points, RIFLE, and MELD. One notable finding of this study was that presence of
proteinuria in combination with SOFA has an even more superior discriminatory power than SOFA alone (Table 6). Moreover, proteinuria plus
SOFA also had the highest Youden index and the best overall correctness of prediction (Table 7). AKI is a common complication in patients
with decompensated liver disease, and its occurrence is correlated to poor prognosis . Recently, several promising urinary protein
biomarkers have been proved to be remarkably helpful for detecting AKI, such as Calprotectin, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin
(NGAL), cystatin C, interleukin-18 (IL-18), kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1), and L-type or liver-type fatty acid-bind protein (LFABP) [2,
21–24]. The presence of protein in urine might reflect structural or functional defects of the glomerular capillary barrier or the
reabsorption receptors in the renal proximal tubules. Proteinuria is not only a sensitive indicator but also a risk factor for acute kidney
injury . Increasing evidence has indicated that proteinuria itself may activate intrarenal complement cascade, upregulate proximal tubular
inflammatory and fibrogenic gene, trigger apoptotic response, and further lead to spreading of renal tubulointerstitial damage and adverse
outcomes . In the literature, urine albumin to creatinine ratio (UACR) is a precise method for measurement of albuminuria and identification
of renal dysfunction [32, 33]. Nevertheless, previous study had documented that preoperative proteinuria could accurately predict the
development of AKI in patients undergoing operation, irrespective of it is determined by UACR or urine dipstick analysis . Previous reports
also demonstrated that calculating urinary calprotectin/creatinine or NGAL/creatinine ratio does not lead to higher prediction accuracy than
using urinary calprotectin or NGAL alone [2, 24]. In this study, proteinuria was detected with the dipstick analysis, the advantages of this
examination are inexpensive and easily performed and interpreted. Analyzed data showed presence of proteinuria on ICU admission (before
transplantation) was correlated to increased risks of AKI, severe infection episodes, in-hospital mortality, and 90-day mortality (Fig. 1).
The occurrence of AKI after transplantation, especially infection related AKI, was correlated to a markedly lower chance of survival
(Table 3). Measurement of preoperative proteinuria might be useful to preemptively identify patients who have increased risk of AKI and
severe infection episodes. Based on the observed results, it seems that avoiding nephrotoxic agents and choosing therapy carefully are
crucial ways of renoprotection for patients present with proteinuria before transplant. More intensive postoperative care and infection
prevention strategies, such as more aggressive prophylactic antimicrobial regimens and strict practice for infection prophylaxis, might also
help to prevent further adverse outcomes for these patients. Further well-powered research is needed to study this issue. Among patients
undergoing liver transplant, development of renal dysfunction may be attributed to intraoperative caval cross-clamping with vascular outflow
obstruction, reperfusion injury, significant infectious event, bleeding, perioperative hypotension with high vasopressor requirement, large-
volume transfusions, exposure to nephrotoxic agents or use of calcineurin inhibitors . As part of the acute phase response, general vascular
permeability increases and the urinary excretion of protein and albumin occur within several hours after operation . In our study, the
decreased-donor graft recipients who had prolonged cold ischemia time and the living-donor graft recipients who had longer warm ischemia
time, were found to have significantly higher incidences of newly onset proteinuria on the first day after operation. These findings are
consistent with previous studies . Moreover, the prevalence of proteinuria decreased significantly within 7 days after operation in the in-
hospital and 90-day survival groups but not in the mortality groups (Fig. 3). It implies that patients with poor physiologic adaptability
are much more intolerable to the transient hemodynamic change of kidney. In addition, the persistence of proteinuria in serial assessment
after liver transplantation might represent delayed recovery from the major operation and signify poor short-term prognosis. Early detection
of AKI after liver transplant could potentially retard the progression of renal dysfunction and prevent further adverse outcomes by prompt
intervention [36, 44]. Many researches have shown that SOFA can completely present courses of major organ dysfunction and dynamic changes of
illness severity after acute insults . We have proposed that SOFA determined on postoperative day 7 has good predictive performance in
short-term outcome of patients receiving liver transplant . However, the renal parameter of the SOFA score, SCr concentration, does not seem
to elevate until decline of renal function over than 50 %. This means that early detecting AKI by SOFA is hardly possible . Our data
revealed that absolute concentration and relative change of SCr levels are not significantly correlated to the presences of proteinuria and
patient outcomes (Table 2, Figs. 1, 2), which highlights that SCr concentration is inaccurate for discovering kidney injury among patients
with decompensated liver disease . On the contrary, the occurrence of proteinuria might represent subtle renal function changes, and it also
signifies generalized inflammatory environment and poor prognosis (correlation between proteinuria and CRP, before operation: P < 0.001;
postoperative day 1: P = 0.005). In this study, the combination of proteinuria improves the flaws of SCr and the prediction ability of SOFA
during perioperative time, particularly on postoperative day 1 (an increase in the AUROC from 0.761 to 0.828) (Tables 6). These exciting
findings seem to demonstrate that presence of proteinuria could provide outstanding early prognostic prediction for patients undergoing
liver transplantation. Despite the promising results obtained in this research, there are some possible limitation should be acknowledged.
Firstly, this research was performed in just one tertiary medical center, so our results might not be exactly generalized to dissimilar
patient population. Secondly, owing to the retrospective nature of our study, not every clinical factor was available. Thirdly, the patient
population contained a high proportion of hepatitis B viral infection (34 %) and may present as a special subgroup in the cirrhotic
patients. Fourthly, predictive precision of logistic regression models is not perfect and flawless. Finally, the prognostic tools were
applied on patients already admitted to the ICU, and were not used as a preadmission screening test, this might skew the analyses. To
conclude, this study showed that preoperative proteinuria is a significant risk factor of hospital mortality in patients undergoing liver
transplantation. For patients exhibiting proteinuria before transplant, we suggest watch out for infection episodes, carefully choose
therapy and do prompt intervention to prevent further adverse outcomes. Avoiding prolonged cold or warm ischemia time of transplantation
could also reduce organ injury from reperfusion. The presence of proteinuria in serial assessment after liver transplantation has been
proven to have early prognostic predictive effect and to assist the SOFA score with better discriminatory power in predicting short-term
outcome. For these reasons, we recommend surveying the presence of proteinuria in preoperative and postoperative serial assessment.
Proteinuria is supposed to be recognized as an important negative predictor for short-term survival of liver transplant patients. Acute
kidney injury Area under the receiver operating characteristic curve Child-pugh points Intensive care units Model for end-stage liver
disease Operation The risk of renal failure, injury to the kidney, failure of kidney function, loss of kidney function, and end-stage renal
failure Serum creatinine Sequential organ failure assessment Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt Urine albumin-creatinine ratio
The authors thank the staff of the Core Lab and Liver Transplantation Team of the Chang Gung Memorial Hospital for technical assistance. We
also express our sincere gratitude to all participants of the CGMH Critical Care Team. None. The data that support the findings of this
study are available from Liver Transplantation Center of the Chang Gung Memorial Hospital but restrictions apply to the availability of
these data, which were used under license for the current study, and so are not publicly available. Data are however available from the
authors upon reasonable request and with permission of Liver Transplantation Center of the Chang Gung Memorial Hospital. YCC and HCP
contributed to the conception and design of this research. HCP contributed to collection and interpretation of data. HCP, JPL, and MJT
contributed to manuscript drafting. WCL provided patient information and participated in the design and coordination. YJC, JPL, MJT, CCJ,
MHT, PCF, CHC, MYC, YCT, CHC, CCH, JTF, and CWY contributed to offering intellectual content of the work and were involved in editing and
revising the manuscript. All authors discussed and contributed to the final manuscript version. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Not applicable. This clinical investigation was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital (approval No.101-2410B). The protocol of the study was designed in full compliance with Good Clinical Practice guidelines and the
principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. In this study, no organs from executed persons were used. Because only preexisting data was
examined, we did not obtrained written informed consent from each patient. Instead, patients were informed of their right for accepting or
refusing enrollment by telephone interview. Before data analysis, the records of patients were anonymized and de-identified. The approaches
are following ordinances concerning informed consent and enrollment expounded in guidelines.
