Epicardial pacing wires (EPWs) are commonly employed for diagnosis and treatment of arrhythmia in the acute phase after cardiac surgery.
Although rare, retained EPWs may cause mild-to-catastrophic complications. The present case demonstrates hemopericardium caused by a mobile
retained EPW. A 49-year-old woman presented to our emergency department with clinical signs of impending cardiac tamponade. She had
undergone ventricular septal defect repair 7 years before this admission. An initial computed tomography (CT) scan revealed hemopericardium
with suspicion of a possible intracardiac lesion. Review of the first and second CT scans, however, revealed a mobile retained EPW
penetrating the pericardium in the first scan, which had moved out of the pericardium in the second scan. Because cardiac injury by the EPW
was suspected, the patient was transferred to another medical center for further treatment. According to our experience with this case,
diagnosis may be incorrect if CT is unable to obtain decisive images of the mobile EPW at the correct time. Multiplanar reconstruction and
volume rendering can increase diagnostic accuracy. In conclusion, if hemopericardium is present without clear etiology in a patient with a
retained EPW, a nearby mobile EPW may be the cause. Epicardial pacing wires (EPWs) are routinely used during cardiac surgery and usually
removed before discharge. Although rare, retained EPWs may cause mild-to-catastrophic complications. Here, we report a case of
hemopericardium caused by a mobile retained EPW, which was initially missed. The case report was approved by the Chang Gung Medical
Foundation Institutional Review Board, Taipei, Taiwan. Although written informed consent was not obtained, the patient's information was
anonymized and de-identified. A 49-year-old woman reported symptoms of acute chest pain, progressive dizziness, and syncope at her home in
August 2009. She was sent to our emergency department with clinical signs of impending cardiac tamponade. Chest radiography revealed
cardiomegaly and blunting of bilateral lateral costophrenic angles (Fig. 1). She had undergone ventricular septal defect repair
approximately 7 years before this admission. Chest radiograph showing cardiomegaly, blunting of bilateral lateral costophrenic angles, and
postoperative changes from previous cardiac surgery with sternal wires. Chest computed tomography (CT) performed using a 64-slice CT scanner
(Somatom Sensation 64; Siemens Health Care, Forchheim, Germany) revealed hemopericardium with impending cardiac tamponade (Fig. 2). A
pigtail catheter was inserted into the pericardial space under sonographic guidance, and approximately 300 mL blood was drained. Purulent
pericarditis was initially suspected, but laboratory findings did not support this diagnosis. Nonenhanced computed tomography scan, showing
a hyperdense lesion in the pericardial space, suggesting hemopericardium. Under suspicion of a possible intracardiac lesion, cardiac CT
(retrospective electrocardiographic gating, 120 kV, 900 mA, pitch = 0.2, and no dose modulation) with a split-bolus contrast medium
injection was performed using the same CT scanner 3 days after admission. Review of the first and second CT scans with multiplanar
reconstruction (MPR) and volume rendering (VR) revealed a piece of retained EPW penetrating the anterior inferior aspect of the pericardium,
close to the right ventricle (approximately 0.9 cm of the EPW was inside the pericardial space) (Fig. 3A–D). The lesion was missed on the
first CT scan because only axial images had been assessed. We also noted that the EPW was mobile (open arrowheads in Fig. 3C and G) and had
moved outward in the second scan (Fig. 3E–H). (A–D) First computed tomography (CT) scan with multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) and volume
rendering (VR), showing the epicardial pacing wire (EPW) penetrating the anterior inferior aspect of the pericardium (arrows in A–D).
Approximately 0.9 cm of the EPW was inside the pericardial space. (E–H) Second CT scan with MPR and VR, showing that the EPW had moved
outward compared with the first CT scan (open arrowheads in C and G). Because cardiac injury by the EPW was suspected, the patient was
transferred to another medical center for further treatment. Surgeons there decided on observation rather than surgical removal. The patient
has had no recurrent symptoms. EPWs are commonly employed for diagnosis and treatment of arrhythmia in the acute phase after cardiac surgery
and are routinely removed before discharge. Although they are removed by constant gentle traction, they can get caught in the epicardium or
along their course through the chest. In such situations, the EPW should be pulled as far as possible and cut close to the skin to allow the
cut end to retract into the tissue. Complications of a retained EPW include migration, infection, coronary artery compression, arrhythmia,
graft injury, myocardial infarction, retroaortic abscess, aortic bleeding, hemopericardium, pneumopericardium, diaphragmatic hernia,
bronchocutaneous fistula, or even colon perforation; migration is the most common complication. EPW-related hemopericardium and cardiac
tamponade are usually associated with EPW removal. A retained EPW causing hemopericardium is relatively uncommon and may be caused by
perforation or graft injury. Retained EPWs are less obvious than sternal wires because of their thickness and position. In our case, the
retained EPW was barely visible on initial chest radiography because of unsatisfactory exposure condition. Moreover, because the EPW was
perpendicular to axial CT images, we initially missed the diagnosis. However, review of the first and second CT scans with MPR and VR
clearly revealed the relative position of the EPW and allowed for accurate diagnosis. To the best of our knowledge, there is no literature
describing kinetic movement of an EPW. In this case, the EPW was mobile and had penetrated the pericardium, causing hemopericardium on the
first CT scan. However, the EPW had moved out of the pericardium on the second CT scan. Diagnosis may be incorrect if CT is unable to obtain
decisive images at the correct time. In fact, clinicians usually do not repeat CT in a short period of time. Therefore, if there is
hemopericardium of unknown cause or repeated hemopericardium, physicians should remain alert for any nearby EPWs. In the present case,
although there were no surgical specimens to correlate with the CT findings, the images were useful for definitive diagnosis. CT with MPR
and VR is useful for accurate diagnosis in patients with EPWs. Furthermore, if hemopericardium is present without clear etiology in a
patient with a retained EPW, a nearby mobile EPW may be the cause. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography, EPW = epicardial pacing wire,
MPR = multiplanar reconstruction, VR = volume rendering. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
