Primary lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths globally, and approximately 50% had metastatic disease at the time of
diagnosis. A rectal mass and unintended weight loss are common manifestations of rectal cancer. Our case presented with a rectal mass, but
workup revealed a metastatic lesion from lung cancer. Lung cancer metastases to the lower gastrointestinal tract imply reduced survival
compared with the already poor mean survival of stage IV lung cancer. Despite relevant therapy, the patient died 5 months after referral.
Primary lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths globally. Metastatic disease at diagnosis is very common, typically
involving liver, brain, adrenals, and bones. Symptomatic intestinal/colonic metastases affect 0.2â€“0.5% (5% in autopsy studies) but imply a
median survival of 3 months compared with 8 months in overall stage IV non-small cell lung cancer (1, 2). This case presented with a rectal
mass, a common clinical manifestation of another common malignancy, colorectal cancer. The case illustrates the unpredictability of
malignant spread, and the occasional mismatch between clinical presentation and tissue sampling results. A 70-year-old male never-smoker
experienced an 8-kg weight loss during 6 months, alternating diarrhoea/obstipation without bloody stools, slight coughing, and dyspnoea. He
had a history of hypertension for many years, uncomplicated and treated with losartan/thiazide 50/12.5 mg and amlodipine 10 mg once daily.
Nine years earlier, he was diagnosed with a transitiocellular, papillary bladder tumour, grade III with invasion; underwent successful
endoscopic resection without need for oncological treatment; and was followed with annual cystoscopy. Three years later, he was surgically
treated for a relapse of transitiocellular, papillary bladder tumour (grade I) and was followed for an additional 5 years without signs of
recurrent disease at annual cystoscopy. He was a retired industrial worker but with no known occupational exposure to asbestosis, silica, or
dust. He was living with his spouse and had no hobbies resulting in exposure to hazardous fumes or dusts. He was referred to an outpatient
colonoscopy (17 months after he ended urological control visits), revealing an obstructing lower rectal mass. Only a paediatric coloscope
could pass the lesion, and biopsies revealed adenocarcinoma, immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses positive for CK7 and TTF-1 (Fig. 1), and
negative for GATA, CK20, CDX2, PLAP, CD117, PSA, and S100P. PCR showed wild-type EGFR status. Direct histological comparison showed no
resemblance with his urological cancer. Immunohistochemical staining of histological biopsy from rectal mass: an adenocarcinoma positive for
TTF-1 (A) and CK7 (B). Thoracoabdominal contrast-enhanced PET-CT scan showed multiple, PET-positive, enlarged mediastinal and
retroperitoneal lymph nodes, a right-sided pleural effusion and associated ipsilateral compression lower lobe atelectasis, ascites, and a
tumour located in the rectum with invasion to levator muscles and vesicula seminalis (Figs. 2 and 3). Cytological sampling from mediastinal
lymph nodes and pleural exudate showed identical adenocarcinoma including IHC profile cells with a high proliferation index assessed by
Ki-67. A bronchoscopy showed no visual tumour. Chest PET-CT scan showing no sign of a primary lung lesion but multiple enlarged lymph nodes,
a left-sided compression atelectasis, and ipsilateral pleural effusion. Abdominal PET-CT scan showing a rectal mass, moderate quantities of
ascites, and enlarged lymph nodes in pelvis and groin. At a multidisciplinary team conference, it was decided that the final diagnosis was
primary lung cancer, stage TxN3M1b with local metastases to mediastinal lymph nodes, pleura, rectum, and peritoneum. The IHC results were
considered to rule out primary colorectal cancer or vesical cancer with thoracic dissemination. He started palliative
carboplatin/vinorelbine and avastin (43 days after referral to gastroenterologist) as 4 series with 3 weeks intervals. Three-month PET-CT
showed a mixed response with an overall sign of progression, and second-line chemotherapy was planned. Before onset, he was admitted with
acute dyspnoea and died 2 days later. The current case describes a rare site of primary lung cancer metastasis with fatal outcome 153 days
after referral. Despite an unusual presentation, neither diagnosis nor therapy onset was delayed. One can question the validity of the
diagnosis as the patient was a never-smoker without evident lung lesions. However, as three key IHC markers for colorectal cancer were
negative, positive CK7 and TTF-1, and no upper G-I CT/PET lesions, neither a primary upper or lower G-I cancer seems likely (3). We found
three published case reports on rectal metastases from lung cancer: two were late metastases in earlier surgically resected patients (4, 5),
and a recently published case on metastatic, poorly differentiated squamous cell lung carcinoma with multiple metastases to liver, skin,
bone, and muscle (6). It is unresolved if intestinal spread reflects a more aggressive or more advanced disease. G-I metastasis may occur
through haematogenic spread via the mesenteric inferior artery supplying descending colon, sigmoideum and superior part of rectum (7, 8).
Yet, cancer metastasis is complex, involving coordination of expression/suppression of numerous genes, and is not fully understood. IL-8
overexpression may contribute to a more aggressive phenotype yet our case was negative for CK20, the IL-8 receptor (9). Improved survival
after intestinal single-metastasis resection has been demonstrated in carefully selected patients, but for most patients with intestinal
metastases, palliation remains the only available therapy (10). An improved understanding of the pathobiological mechanisms involved in
cancer metastases is needed to elucidate targets for improved therapy. The authors have not received any funding or benefits from industry
or elsewhere to conduct this study.
