In 2014, Pang et al. reported three cases with vitelliform submaculopathy as a preceding lesion of primary intraocular lymphoma (PIOL).
Here, we report a case with an atypical presentation of PIOL who initially presented with vitelliform submaculopathy, vitreous haze and
preripheral retinal focus. A 73-year-old female initially visited another hospital with a chief complaint of acute reduced vision in the
right eye. Funduscopic examination of the right eye showed a yellowish retinal lesion at the fovea with vitreous haze and retinal foci
scattered in the peripheral region. Spectral-domain optic coherence tomography (SD-OCT) revealed a hyperreflective subretinal debris above
the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) at the fovea, suggesting vitelliform submaculopathy. Vitrectomy was performed to improve visualization
of the retinal lesions and for examination of PIOL. Vitreous cytology was class III and cytokine analysis of vitreous fluid showed increased
IL-10 and an IL-10/IL-6 ratio >1, suggesting PIOL. Thereafter, there was a sub-RPE infiltration of presumed lymphoma in the nasal retina,
and PCR analysis of anterior chamber fluid indicated IgH gene rearrangement, leading to diagnosis of PIOL. Three months later, there was
complete disappearance of the vitelliform submacular lesion, with resultant disruption and thinning of the outer retinal layers on SD-OCT
images. Clinicians should be aware of atypical manifestations of PIOL such as vitelliform submaculopathy and peripheral retinal foci with
vitreous haze. The patient’s unusual funduscopic changes are findings that have not reported in patients with PIOL. Intraocular lymphomas
are a rare form of ocular malignancy and involve two types. Primary intraocular lymphoma (PIOL) affects the vitreous, retina, choroid or
optic nerve and secondary intraocular lymphoma is seen in patients who have systemic lymphoma . This disease has a poor prognosis with a
5-year survival rate of 61 %, and the incidence has increased recently . The disease is typical of masquerade syndromes and is often
difficult to diagnose if no characteristic vitreous haze or subretinal focus is present. In 2014, Pang et al. described three cases in which
vitelliform submaculopathy preceded typical lesions of PIOL, as the first report of this event . Foci in those cases spontaneously
disappeared in a brief period, with a subsequently diagnosis of PIOL. Here, we describe an atypical presentation of PIOL in a patient who
initially presented with vitelliform submaculopathy, vitreous haze and preripheral retinal focus, in which PIOL was diagnosed in the
subsequent course. The patient was a 73-year-old Japanese woman who had been suffering from visual loss and a history of floaters in the
right eye from May 2012. The right eye had vitreous haze and retinal white foci in the peripheral fundus, the causes of which were unclear
in a detailed examination. For further examination and treatment, she was referred to Jikei University Hospital and visited in June 2012.
She was immunocompetent and had no underlying systemic diseases. On presentation, the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.02 OD and
1.2 OS. There was no relative afferent pupillary defect. The patient had no cells in the anterior chamber and diffuse vitreous cells with
trace haze in the right eye. Funduscopic examination of the right eye showed a yellow submacular lesion at the fovea, in addition to
vitreous haze and retinal foci scattered in the peripheral region (Fig. 1a). The left eye appeared normal. Spectral-domain optic coherence
tomography (SD-OCT) revealed hyperreflective subretinal debris resembling vitelliform deposition above the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)
band (Fig. 1b). Fluorescein angiography (FA) imaging showed multiple hyperfluorescent lesions of various sizes in the peripheral region
(Fig. 1c). Serologic test results, including those for antitoxoplasma IgG and IgM antibodies, angiotensin-converting enzyme, and viral
antibodies such as herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster virus and cytomegalovirus, were within normal limits. Chest X-ray and magnetic
resonance imaging were unremarkable.Fig. 1Fundus photograph, fluorescein angiography and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-
OCT) at initial presentation. a. Fundus photograph showing submacular yellow material at the fovea and multiple peripheral retinal foci. b.
Fluorescein angiography showing multiple hyperfluorescent peripheral lesions. c. SD-OCT revealed hyperreflective material deposition above
the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) band consistent with submacular yellow material Fundus photograph, fluorescein angiography and
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) at initial presentation. a. Fundus photograph showing submacular yellow material at
the fovea and multiple peripheral retinal foci. b. Fluorescein angiography showing multiple hyperfluorescent peripheral lesions. c. SD-OCT
revealed hyperreflective material deposition above the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) band consistent with submacular yellow material
Vitreous haze slowly worsened within a few months. A 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy was performed to improve visualization of the retinal
lesions and for examination of causative microorganisms or PIOL. Vitreous cytology was class III and the cytokine analysis of vitreous fluid
revealed increased IL-10 and an IL-10/IL-6 ratio >1, suggesting PIOL. Three months later, there were appearances of new multiple yellow-
white sub-RPE infltrates in the peripheral fundus (Fig. 2a, c). At this time, SD-OCT still showed a hyperreflective material above the RPE
band (Fig. 2b). PCR analysis of the anterior chamber fluid revealed IgH gene rearrangement, thus allowing a definitive diagnosis of PIOL. In
a few months later, SD-OCT revealed hyperreflective bands and nodules above the RPE band with regression of the vitelliform debris (Fig. 3).
Finally, the patient decided to treat with intravitreal methotrexate injections (weekly 400 μg/100 mL for 6 weeks). The patient has survived
with a total-follow up of 31 months, with no invlolvement of the central nervous system. The right eye has remained recurrence-free
24 months after the 20th intravitreal methotrexate injections. BCVA improved to 0.4 in the right eye.Fig. 2Fundus photograph and spectral-
domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) at 3 months after initial visit. a. Fundus photograph showing sub-retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE) white mass in the temporal region. b. There was decrease in the vitelliform debris at the fovea seen with SD-OCT. c. SD-OCT revealed
steep elevation of the RPE band consistent with sub-RPE massFig. 3Fundus photograph and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-
OCT) at 6 months after initial visit. a. Fundus photograph showing multiple sub-retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) white mass in the temporal
and nasal region. b. There was decrease in the vitelliform debris at the fovea seen with SD-OCT. C. SD-OCT revealed complete resolution of
the vitelliform debris and hyperreflective nodules at the RPE level Fundus photograph and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-
OCT) at 3 months after initial visit. a. Fundus photograph showing sub-retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) white mass in the temporal region.
b. There was decrease in the vitelliform debris at the fovea seen with SD-OCT. c. SD-OCT revealed steep elevation of the RPE band consistent
with sub-RPE mass Fundus photograph and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) at 6 months after initial visit. a. Fundus
photograph showing multiple sub-retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) white mass in the temporal and nasal region. b. There was decrease in the
vitelliform debris at the fovea seen with SD-OCT. C. SD-OCT revealed complete resolution of the vitelliform debris and hyperreflective
nodules at the RPE level This case highlights some atypical features that can be associated with PIOL. On initial presentation, vitreous
haze, vitelliform submaculopathy and peripheral retinal foci were present simultaneously, with subsequent appearance of sub-RPE infiltrates,
a typical lesion of PIOL. This was followed by multiple lesion occurrence and growth, together with spontaneous disappearance of vitelliform
submaculopathy. In 2014, Pang et al. reported three cases in which vitelliform submaculopathy preceded typical lesions of PIOL . Our case
has several different features in clinical course, unlike their cases. First, our case presented with vitreous haze, vitelliform
submaculopathy and peripheral retinal foci as an initial presentation, in contrast to Pang et al. cases. Secondly, in our case, there was
development of sub-RPE infiltration in the peripheral retina without regression of vitelliform submaculopathy. Although Pang et al. pointed
out the importance of vitelliform submaculopathy as a preceding lesion in PIOL, we thus think this condition may be involved in one of
initial manifestations of PIOL. Finally, there was an occurrence of hyperreflective nodules at the RPE level and disruption of the ellipsoid
zone after complete disappearance of vitelliform submaculopathy. In 13 cases of PIOL described by Keino et al., nearly one-half of the cases
involved hyperreflective nodules at the RPE level and disruption of the ellipsoid zone during follow-up . Although Keino et al. did not
investigate an association SD-OCT patterns with clinical course, we suggest that the occurrence of vitelliform submaculopathy can be an
early form of lymphoma-associated retinopathy and this condition may be seen with various manifestations in the initial phase of PIOL. PIOL
can present with atypical fundus manifestations such as vitelliform submaculopathy and peripheral retinal foci with vitreous haze. SD-OCT
may be useful for early detection and monitoring of small macular abnormalities in this disease. Best-corrected visual acuity Primary
intraocular lymphoma Retinal pigment epithelium Spectral-domain optic coherence tomography. Submitting author: Koji Komatsu, Department of
Ophthalmology, Jikei University School of Medicine, 3-25-8 Nishishimbashi, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105-8461, Japan. The authors have no financial
support in this study. The case report has no funding involved. All data supporting our findings will be shared upon request, although the
majority is contained within the manuscript. KK, TS and HT (Hiroshi Tsuneoka) carried out the initial chart reviewing and drafted the
manuscript. KK, TS, TK, and HT (Hideki Tsuji) added details to the initial case report, and participated in its overall design. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. The authors report no competing interests. The authors alone are responsible for the content and
writing of the paper. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Not applicable.
