Correspondence to Dr.　Nobuyuki Masaki, masakinobuyuki@hotmail.com Eosinophilic myocarditis may be accompanied by Churg-Strauss syndrome
(CSS). We report a case of CSS that was accompanied by myocardial changes in the early stage. A 71-year-old woman complained of mild chest
pain at rest, but routine echocardiography did not reveal any endocardial abnormalities. Four months later, the patient was hospitalized due
to congestive heart failure with neuropathy of both upper extremities. A diagnosis of eosinophilic myocarditis was made based on the
patient's laboratory results and the presence of mural thrombus. This case illustrates that, although early eosinophilic myocarditis is an
important differential diagnosis in patients with chest pain, it may be difficult to identify in without an apparent mural thrombus. A
71-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with mild chest pain at rest that had persisted for 1 week. She had a medical history of
bronchial asthma, chronic sinusitis, and splenectomy due to Banti disease at 38 years of age. Her vital signs were stable and a physical
examination revealed no abnormalities. A chest radiograph appeared normal (Fig. 1a). A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed non-specific
changes, which suggested mild left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy (Fig. 1b). Echocardiography showed the mild thickening of the LV wall and
minimal pericardial effusion behind the LV posterior wall (Fig. 2). The patient's white blood cell count was within the normal range (7,700
/μL). At that time, differential leukocyte counts were not automatically reported. The patient's serum troponin I level was slightly
elevated (4.04 ng/mL), but her creatine kinase level was within normal limits. Chest roentgenograms and electrocardiograms. A chest
roentgenogram (a) from the first admission appeared normal, and an electrocardiogram (b) that was taken at the same time demonstrated
nonspecific ST-T changes. However, the chest roentgenogram from the second admission (c) showed pleural effusion and infiltration, which was
suggestive of eosinophilic pneumonia and heart failure. An electrocardiogram from the second admission showed almost no changes. Routine
echocardiography from the patient’s first admission. Parasternal (a) and short-axis (b) views in the early stage of eosinophilic myocarditis
show a superficial layer on the endocardium, suggesting a thrombus (arrow). The normal appearance of the patient's coronary arteries on
coronary angiography ruled out acute coronary syndrome. However, left ventriculography (LVG) showed the abnormal pooling of contrast medium
within the myocardium (Fig. 3). Her chest pain spontaneously resolved, but careful outpatient observation was planned because a definitive
diagnosis had not been made. Left ventriculography from the patient’s first admission. The diastolic (a) and systolic (b) phases show an
abnormal pattern of contrast medium at the apex, with normal systolic function. Four months later, she complained of progressive respiratory
exhaustion. Her symptoms were suggestive of New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III heart failure. She also had fatigue, weight loss,
and sensory neuropathy of the upper extremities. At this time, she was conscious and alert with a body temperature of 36.4℃, a heart rate of
90 beats/min, a blood pressure of 124/70 mmHg, a percutaneous oxygen saturation of 94% on room air, and coarse crackles in the bilateral
lung fields. A chest radiograph revealed pulmonary congestion and infiltration (Fig. 1c). An electrocardiogram showed no dramatic changes.
She was hospitalized again for a further work-up and treatment. A laboratory analysis showed marked eosinophilia: her white blood cell count
was 10,700 /μL with 31% eosinophils (3,317 /μL). Her serum IgE level was elevated to 1,257 IU/mL. The patient was negative for anti-nuclear
antibody, MPO-ANCA, and PR3-ANCA. Her brain natriuretic peptide was elevated to 1,164.6 pg/mL. A high plasma D-dimer level of 9.0 IU/L
suggested the presence of a thrombus. Echocardiography showed a diffuse mural thrombus-like echo in the LV endocardium (Fig. 4a), although
M-mode measurement demonstrated normal systolic function with an ejection fraction of 74%. Color Doppler echocardiography showed unusual
blood flow from the endocardium and mural thrombus into the LV cavity during systole (Fig. 4b). Pulse Doppler echocardiography indicated
diastolic dysfunction, pseudo-normal LV inflow pattern, a deceleration time of 131 ms, and an E/A ratio 1.83. We therefore thought that the
patient's heart failure was caused by diastolic dysfunction and a decrease in stroke volume due to the thrombus that occupied the left
ventricular cavity. Because of the patient's marked eosinophilia, bone marrow aspiration cytology was performed to exclude the possibility
of lymphoproliferative abnormalities and genetic disorders. In accordance with the diagnostic criteria for allergic granulomatous angiitis
proposed by the Research Committee of Intractable Vasculitis of the Ministry of Health and Welfare, Japan (1998), the patient was diagnosed
with Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS) with an LV mural thrombus due to eosinophilic myocarditis. We also suspected that this was combined with
eosinophilic pneumonia, because thoracentesis revealed an increase in eosinophils in the patient's pleural effusion. Echocardiography at the
time of the diagnosis of Churg-Strauss syndrome and after the initiation of treatment. The echocardiogram from the third day of the second
admission (a) demonstrates a mural thrombus (white arrow) occupying the left ventricular cavity. Color Doppler echocardiography (b) shows
two blood flows from the endocardium of the lateral wall. On the 20th day during steroid and anticoagulation therapy, the superficial layer
of the thrombus was detached from the endocardium (c). On the 91st day, the thrombus had disappeared (d). Treatment for heart failure was
initiated with an intravenous infusion of carperitide 0.1γ for 6 days from the time admission. We also initiated steroid pulse therapy with
prednisolone (PSL, 1,000 mg per day) for 3 days from the 6th day of hospitalization, followed by oral PSL (starting from 40 mg/day). Her
eosinophilia disappeared soon after the start of PSL therapy; and her white blood cell count was 7,500 /μl with 0.1% of eosinophils (7.5
/μL) on the 12th day of hospitalization. The simultaneous administration of intravenous unfractionated heparin and oral warfarin was
initiated. During anticoagulation therapy, echocardiography revealed that the mural thrombus was detached from the LV endocardium (Fig. 4c).
At this time, the surgical resection of the thrombus was considered because of the high risk of thromboembolism. However, after a discussion
between the patient, her family, and cardiac surgeons, she was treated conservatively. The volume of the thrombus eventually diminished
without causing embolization. On the 40th day of hospitalization, she was discharged on oral PSL (25 mg/day). We performed echocardiography
at our outpatient clinic on the 91st day and confirmed that the thrombus had disappeared (Fig. 4d). There were no after-effects on the
patient's systolic function and the patient's diastolic function had recovered; the ejection fraction was 77%, the deceleration time was 210
ms, and the E/A ratio was 0.85. The dose of PSL was finally reduced to 7.5 mg, with the patient remaining in a stable condition.
Eosinophilic myocarditis is considered to involve three steps of endocardial changes: necrotic, thrombotic, and fibrotic phases. The
pathogenesis involves the infiltration of the endocardium and myocardium by cytotoxic eosinophils that are overproduced due to various
causes, such as an allergic reaction due to CSS, as occurred in the present case. The eosinophilic granules cause tissue damage and
inflammation of the endocardium, followed by formation of intramural thrombus. Eventually, the damaged myocardial tissues are replaced by
fibrosis, which causes the diastolic and systolic dysfunction of the ventricle. The early diagnosis of eosinophilic endocarditis is
therefore crucial for preserving cardiac function, but requires careful echocardiographic examination for the following features of the
disease: 1) diffuse thrombus deposits on the surface of the injured endocardium that may mimic myocardial thickening; 2) minimal thrombus
growth on the LV apex; and 3) preserved systolic function in the presence of a mural thrombus. Because thrombus formation usually occurs at
the most akinetic myocardium in cases of myocardial infarction and dilated cardiomyopathy, a mural thrombus on the normally functioning
myocardium could be overlooked. In our patient, the subtle findings of LV thrombus formation were not identified on echocardiography during
the patient's first hospitalization. On retrospective examination, however, a layer of mural thrombus could be distinguished (Fig. 1). In
the present case, the performance of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), in addition to echocardiography, might have led to an earlier
diagnosis and treatment. MRI has now been demonstrated to clearly depict the cardiac involvement of eosinophilic myocarditis, including
subendocardial inflammation and necrosis and endocardial thrombus formation in the early stages of the disease; in fact, it has become a
standard examination for the early diagnosis of this disease (1-6). A previous study reported the characteristic features of mural thrombus
formation on the endocardium, specifically multiple filling defects (with contrast medium) during LVG (5). However, LVG should not be
performed if a thrombus is present in the LV. Endomyocardial biopsy is an important method for diagnosing eosinophilic myocarditis in
patients who exhibit the eosinophilic infiltration of myocardial tissue. However, this invasive examination should not be performed unless
other non-invasive tests are not sufficient to make a diagnosis. Unfortunately, we did not perform this examination at the first admission.
Echocardiography and MRI are therefore important diagnostic modalities for patients with early eosinophilic myocarditis. This case provided
unique echocardiographic findings. The direction of the color flow from the endocardium to the LV cavity was considered to be a clue for the
presence of endocardial thrombus formation. The image suggested that blood was squeezed through the gaps of the mural thrombi during the
motion of the systolic wall (Fig. 4b). Furthermore, echocardiography during anticoagulation showed that the layer of thrombus on the
endocardium was detached and present in the LV cavity (Fig. 4c). Based on these findings, we were convinced that both the apex and the
mildly hypertrophic middle LV walls had mural thrombi on the surface. A previous report on a similar case of CSS with eosinophilic
myocarditis showed that a thrombus in the LV apex caused the acute occlusion of the abdominal aorta (6). In the present case, although the
LV wall motion was preserved and despite the risk of thromboembolism, the fragmented thrombus resolved with medical treatment without any
consequences. We hope that these images and findings will be helpful for improving the early diagnosis and treatment of eosinophilic
endocarditis in patients with CSS.
