An estimated 1.2 million Americans have indications for using antiretroviral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to prevent HIV acquisition. For
many of these at-risk individuals, the best opportunity to learn about and receive PrEP will be during routine visits to their generalist
primary care clinicians. However, few generalist clinicians have prescribed PrEP, primarily because of practical concerns about providing
PrEP in primary care settings. The experiences of specialized primary care clinicians who have prescribed PrEP can inform the feasibility of
PrEP provision by generalists. During January to February 2015, 35 primary care clinicians at a community health centre in Boston that
specializes in the care of sexual and gender minorities completed anonymous surveys about their experiences and practices with PrEP
provision. Responses were analyzed with descriptive statistics. Thirty-two clinicians (response rate=91%) completed the surveys. Nearly all
clinicians (97%) had prescribed PrEP (median 20 patients, interquartile range 11–33). Most clinicians reported testing and risk-reduction
counselling practices concordant with U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines for PrEP. Clinicians indicated that
patients using PrEP experienced medication toxicities infrequently and generally reported high adherence. However, some clinicians’
practices differed from guideline recommendations, and some clinicians observed patients with increased risk behaviours. Most clinicians
(79%) rated PrEP provision as easy to accomplish, and 97% considered themselves likely to prescribe PrEP in the future. In a primary care
clinic with specialized expertise in HIV prevention, clinicians perceived that PrEP provision to large numbers of patients was safe,
feasible and potentially effective. Efforts to engage generalist primary care clinicians in PrEP provision could facilitate scale-up of this
efficacious intervention. A Corrigendum has been published for this paper. Please see
http://www.jiasociety.org/index.php/jias/article/view/21596 As there are 50,000 new HIV infections in the United States annually, effective
HIV prevention strategies are needed . Studies have demonstrated that HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), the use of antiretroviral
medications by at-risk uninfected persons, is safe and can reduce HIV transmission among men who have sex with men (MSM) , HIV
serodiscordant couples , men and women with multiple concurrent or sequential partners and persons who inject drugs . In 2012, the FDA
approved tenofovir-emtricitabine for use as daily PrEP , and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued guidelines
recommending PrEP for HIV prevention in 2014 . Generalist primary care providers (PCPs) could play an important role in implementing PrEP,
as many of the estimated 1.2 million Americans with indications for using PrEP will receive healthcare from these clinicians. Moreover,
there are not enough clinicians with specialized training in HIV-related care to provide access to PrEP for these large numbers of at-risk
individuals. Despite CDC guidelines recommending PrEP, however, few PCPs have prescribed PrEP . Surveys of PCPs suggest that they may be
hesitant to prescribe PrEP because of multiple concerns about utilizing this intervention, including anticipated patient non-adherence,
increased sexual risk-taking and lack of insurance coverage for PrEP . Studies that assess the experiences of early adopter PCPs could
provide valuable evidence about the feasibility of prescribing PrEP in primary care. By identifying the challenges faced by early adopters,
these studies could also inform programmes designed to engage and train generalist PCPs in PrEP provision. Fenway Health, a community health
centre in Boston specializing in healthcare for sexual and gender minorities, is a specialized primary care clinic that has participated in
PrEP-related clinical studies since 2006. PCPs at this centre have been prescribing PrEP since 2011, when Fenway Health issued guidelines
regarding PrEP provision to its clinicians, and PrEP utilization has since become normative at this centre, where multidisciplinary, team-
based PrEP care has been implemented . This study assessed PCP experiences and practices with PrEP provision at Fenway Health to gain a
greater understanding of early adopter clinicians’ perspectives on implementing PrEP in primary care. During January to February 2015, all
PCPs (n=35) at Fenway Health were invited to complete anonymous 35-item surveys assessing experiences with PrEP provision. Surveys assessed
provider demographics, practice characteristics, experiences and practices with PrEP provision, perceptions about feasibility and future
prescribing intentions. Providers were asked to indicate their perceptions of patients’ experiences with several aspects of PrEP
utilization, including: Financial barriers (“Which of the following barriers has prevented a patient from taking PrEP? Lack of insurance
coverage for the cost of PrEP medications; Patient unable to pay out-of-pocket costs; None of the above”); Medication adherence (“In
general, how are levels of adherence to PrEP among your patients? Very poor, Poor, Fair, Good, Very good, Excellent”); Impact of medication
intolerance on adherence (“In general, how have side effects from PrEP negatively impacted patient adherence? Not at all, A small degree, A
moderate degree, A great degree”); and Risk compensation (“Have your patients reported any behaviour changes while using PrEP?” followed by
questions about changes in the frequency of condom use during sex, numbers of sexual partners and the frequency of having sex with HIV-
positive persons: Less often/A smaller number, No change, More often/A greater number, Have not specifically assessed this behaviour).
Respondents were also asked about changes in rates of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) among patients using PrEP (“Have your patients
experienced more STIs as a result of using PrEP? No patients, Some patients, Many patients, Have not specifically discussed/tested for
this.”) Questionnaire development included review by experts in HIV prevention for content validity and cognitive testing with clinicians
for face validity and comprehension. After providing consent, clinicians completed self-administered online surveys. Participants were
compensated $25. Responses were characterized with descriptive statistics (SAS v.9.4). The Institutional Review Board at Fenway Health
approved all study procedures and participants provided consent prior to engaging in study activities. Thirty-two clinicians completed
surveys (response rate=91%). Participants’ median age was 37 years (interquartile range (IQR) 34–51) and 53% were female; 81% identified as
White, 13% as Asian, 3% as Hispanic/Latino and 6% as Multiracial. Fifty per cent of respondents self-identified as gay. The sample was
professionally diverse and included physicians (59%), nurse practitioners (22%) and physician assistants (19%). Most participants provided
primary care to HIV-positive patients (median 50 patients, IQR 15–130). All respondents (N=32) believed PrEP to be highly efficacious.
Nearly all participants (97%) had prescribed PrEP to at least one patient. Thirty-one respondents had prescribed PrEP to a median of 20
patients from diverse populations, including MSM and members of HIV serodiscordant couples, among others (Table 1). Primary care providers’
experiences with prescribing HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis at a specialized community health centre in Boston Responses are restricted to the
31 respondents who had prescribed PrEP. Percentages exceed 100% for responses that asked participants to select all that apply. Nearly half
of the respondents indicated that lack of insurance or co-pays had prevented patients from using PrEP (Table 1). Most participants performed
testing for renal function, HIV and STIs for all patients initiating PrEP, in accordance with CDC guidelines (Figure 1) . Respondents
generally only utilized HIV viral load testing for patients with elevated risk for having acute HIV infection, including patients with
recent high-risk exposures to HIV or symptoms consistent with acute HIV. For patients using PrEP, most providers conducted quarterly risk-
reduction counselling (71%), HIV testing (77%) and screening for asymptomatic STIs (68%); the remaining providers did so at four to six
month intervals except for one provider who screened for STIs annually. Primary care providers’ reported testing practices before
prescribing HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis. Primary care providers (n=31) indicated whether they performed specific tests for no patients,
only patients they perceived to be at elevated risk for complications or all patients prior to prescribing PrEP. Guidelines recommend
testing for renal function, HIV, STIs and hepatitis B prior to PrEP initiation; guidelines do not recommend liver function tests, complete
blood counts or bone mineral density tests. Numbers inside bars represent percentage of study participants indicating each response
category; numbers inside bars do not total to 100% because of missing responses to individual questions. Patient adherence to PrEP was
perceived to be high (Table 1). Providers generally thought that side effects from PrEP did not commonly affect adherence. Two-thirds of
respondents had ≥1 patient discontinue PrEP, for various reasons (Table 1), including HIV acquisition (one respondent). Some PCPs indicated
that patients had disclosed increased sexual risk behaviours after initiating PrEP, including using condoms less often during anal sex
(42%), having more sexual partners (23%) and having sex with HIV-positive persons more frequently (29%) (Table 1). One-third of respondents
perceived that some of their patients had experienced increased frequencies of STIs after initiating PrEP. A majority of respondents
described PrEP provision as “Very easy” (35%) or “Somewhat easy” (42%), and nearly all clinicians considered themselves likely to prescribe
PrEP in the future (Table 1). This is one of the first studies to demonstrate provision of PrEP by multiple primary care clinicians to large
numbers of patients at a community health centre. Clinicians reported prescribing practices that were largely consistent with CDC guidelines
, and they perceived that patients were generally adherent to PrEP and infrequently needed to discontinue PrEP due to adverse effects. The
most common reason for discontinuing PrEP was patient preference, which is consistent with prior studies and may be because patients prefer
not to use PrEP during periods when they perceive themselves to be at lower risk for HIV acquisition. Overall, the results suggest that
clinicians perceived that PrEP was used by their patients in a safe and potentially effective manner during primary care. These findings are
consistent with studies demonstrating the feasibility of PrEP provision in other clinical settings . The major implication of these findings
is that PrEP provision by generalist primary care clinicians, which will be essential for scaling-up PrEP nationally, might also be feasible
if generalists are provided with training on how to prescribe PrEP. Clinicians reported challenges with providing PrEP. Half of the
respondents indicated that financial barriers had prevented patients from utilizing PrEP, similar to prior studies in which clinicians have
cited multiple insurance-related barriers to PrEP provision . Thus, providers and patients should be educated about medication assistance
programmes from the manufacturer of tenofovir-emtricitabine (www.truvada.com/truvada-patient-assistance), as out-of-pocket costs for PrEP
care can amount to several thousand US dollars annually for some patients with healthcare insurance . Some clinicians did not perform all
testing (e.g. hepatitis B testing) or risk-reduction counselling in accordance with CDC guidelines , and some performed tests that are not
recommended (e.g. liver function testing). Studies to understand the reasons for deviations from recommended practices could guide efforts
to improve practices and optimize guideline recommendations. Finally, a minority of clinicians observed increased sexual risk-taking with
PrEP use, consistent with other studies . As PrEP is highly effective when taken daily , adherent patients who increased sexual risk-taking
while using PrEP likely remained at lower risk for acquiring HIV than if they had not used PrEP. This suggests that clinicians should not
withhold PrEP from patients because of concerns about risk compensation. However, increased risk behaviours could promote transmission of
other STIs, which have been detected at high rates among persons using PrEP in care settings ; so clinicians who prescribe PrEP will need to
be rigorous about screening for and treating STIs. This study has limitations. Recruitment was limited to a single community health centre,
so the study findings may not be generalizable to clinicians who practice at other centres. Respondents had experience with prescribing
antiretroviral medications for HIV treatment, and they practiced at a health centre that conducted prior PrEP research. Therefore, these
clinicians may have been more knowledgeable about PrEP and more receptive to adopting PrEP into practice than less experienced PCPs.
Generalist PCPs may be less likely than participants in this study to conduct sexual health assessments routinely during primary care, which
could impede PrEP provision in general primary care settings. Participants may have reported practices consistent with guidelines because of
social desirability bias despite the anonymous survey, so objective assessments of clinicians’ practices (e.g. reviews of medical records)
would strengthen confidence in our findings. Similarly, clinicians’ perceptions of their patients’ behaviours, such as those related to
adherence and sexual risk behaviours, could be inaccurate as a result of recall bias or incomplete disclosure of risk behaviours by
patients, so direct assessments of patient behaviours are needed. A strength of the study is the unusually high response rate for surveys of
clinicians (91%) , which suggests that non-response bias is likely to be limited despite the small sample size. In this study, clinicians
with specialized expertise in HIV prevention perceived that PrEP provision to large numbers of patients was feasible, safe and potentially
effective in a primary care clinic. As most persons at risk for acquiring HIV will not have access to clinics with specialized knowledge of
HIV prevention, programmes to train more generalist primary care clinicians to prescribe PrEP should be developed as a way to ensure wider
and more equitable access to PrEP nationally. This work was supported by the National Institute of Health (K23-MH098795), the Harvard
University Center for AIDS Research (P30-AI060354), and Gilead Sciences. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does
not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The sponsors had no role in study design; in the
collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in writing the report; and in the decision to submit the article for publication. Dr.
Krakower and Dr. Mayer have conducted research with support from Gilead Sciences. Dr. Mayer has conducted research with support from ViiV.
Dr. Melbourne is an employee of Gilead Sciences. There are no other conflicts of interest to report. DSK, KMM, CG, KM and KHM conceptualised
and designed the study, and DSK, KMM, CG and KHM acquired, analyzed and interpreted the data; DSK drafted the manuscript, and DSK, KMM, CG,
KM and KHM revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual content. DSK, KMM, CG, KM and KHM have given final approval for the
version to be published.
