Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 64 Final Diagnosis: Segmental absence of intestinal musculature Symptoms:
Abdominal discomfort Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Colectomy Specialty: Diagnostics, Laboratory Rare disease Segmental absence of
intestinal musculature is a well described entity in premature infants. It presents with peritonitis, bowel perforation, and obstruction.
The diagnosis is based on pathologic observation of absence of intestinal musculature. Researchers hypothesized that this entity is a result
of a vascular accident during embryogenesis. However, segmental absence of intestinal musculature is no longer limited to the pediatric
population. Recently, a few cases have been described in adults with and without significant vascular diseases. This change in the age of
the affected population with segmental absence of intestinal musculature makes the understanding of the pathogenesis of this entity even
more challenging. Here, we report a case of segmental absence of intestinal musculature in a 64-year-old female. The patient presented to
the emergency room with sudden onset of abdominal pain and signs of peritonitis. Abdominal computed tomography showed free air in the
abdomen. Laparotomy was performed, and a perforation involving the descending colon was identified. Left hemicolectomy was performed.
Pathologic examination of the resected colon showed segmental absence of intestinal musculature. Although the pathologic diagnosis of
segmental absence of intestinal musculature is straightforward, the assumption that this condition is limited to the pediatric population is
a major player in overlooking this diagnosis in adults. Pathologists should be aware that this condition can present in adults and is
segmental. Gross and microscopic examination of perforated intestine is required to reach the correct diagnosis. To our knowledge, twelve
cases of this entity have been described in adults. Here we present the thirteenth case of segmental absence of intestinal musculature in an
adult, and we discuss the clinical and pathologic findings of this entity as well as its pathogenesis. Segmental absence of intestinal
musculature (SAIM) is a well described entity in the pediatric population, especially premature infants. It is diagnosed based on pathologic
examination of the bowel. The presentation of this condition in adults is very rare. To the best of our knowledge, twelve cases of SAIM have
been described in adults. Here, we report the thirteenth case of SAIM in a 64-year-old female, and we discuss the clinical and pathologic
findings of SAIM in adults. The patient was a 64-year-old female with a known history of gastroesophageal reflux disease, hiatal hernia,
chronic abdominal pain with constipation, and family history of osteogenesis imperfecta. The patient had no history of cardiovascular
diseases and no history of major surgeries other than caesarian section. Multiple radiological studies were conducted to investigate the
abdominal pain, and no abnormalities were detected. She then presented to the emergency room with sudden onset of severe abdominal pain. The
pain started two weeks prior, and it was associated with fever and absence of bowel movement for five days. The physical examination was
significant for abdominal distention, tenderness, rigidity, and absent bowel sound. An abdominal computed tomography scan showed free air in
the abdomen. Laparotomy was then performed and showed descending colon perforation. Left hemicolectomy with colo-colonic anastomosis was
performed, and the resected bowel was sent to the pathology lab for further examination. The hemicolectomy specimen consisted of a 34.5 cm
(in length) ×2.0–3.2 cm (in diameter) segment of colon with stapled ends and up to a 4.5 cm portion of attached peri-colonic fat. The colon
had a 2.7 cm area of perforation 5.0 cm from the closest stapled margin. Two segments of the colon adjacent to the perforation site had thin
wall with loss of the muscular layer (Figure 1). The peri-colonic fat had two small lymph nodes. Sampling of the perforation, colonic wall
adjacent to perforation, stapled margins, and lymph nodes was performed. The sampled tissue was then embedded in paraffin and stained with
hematoxylin and eosin stain. The microscopic examination revealed acute inflammation and colonic perforation through a muscular wall defect.
There was abrupt loss of muscularis propria in the bowel segment with grossly thinned wall. No thrombosed blood vessel, loss of nerves, or
loss of mucosa, submucosa, or serosa was seen. The colonic tissues at the stapled margins were unremarkable. The lymph nodes were reactive
(Figures 2–5). The patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged ten days postoperatively. However, she presented four months
later with multiple intraabdominal abscesses and severe inflammation of the small bowel secondary to anastomotic leak. Irrigation and
drainage of the abscesses were performed. The anastomotic leak was repaired, and segments of the small and large bowel were resected.
Pathologic examination of the resected bowel showed acute and chronic inflammation. No loss of intestinal musculature was noted. In 1997,
Darcha et al. described the first case of SAIM in adults in a 64-year-old female, who had iatrogenic sigmoid colon perforation during
endoscopic removal of a rectal polyp . A study published by Tamai et al. described seven cases of SAIM in a retrospective study involving
patients who presented with spontaneous intestinal perforation . The true incidence of SAIM is not known, as this entity is segmental and
the diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion. The disease affects men and women equally. The age range of SAIM in adult is 28–64 years.
However, the majority of cases are described in older adults. Clinically, SAIM presents with a sudden episode of intestinal perforation or
obstruction. Associated clinical symptoms include severe abdominal pain, fever, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal distention. Perforation can
be single or multiple. SAIM is described more frequently in the large intestine than in the small intestine. In adults, no cases have been
described in stomach, duodenum, or rectum . A summary of the reported cases of SAIM in adults is provided in Table 1. The pathogenesis of
SAIM is not yet understood. Theoretically, the disease can be congenital or acquired . Congenital SAIM probably results from defects in
embryogenesis. Proposed mechanisms include failure of regression of intestinal diverticula, or over-resorption of muscles during regression
of the omphalomesenteric duct during embryogenesis . Some researchers have suggested that SAIM results from transient ischemia secondary to
vascular accident during embryogenesis, or secondary to transient intussusception . The ischemia theory might help explain some of the
acquired cases of SAIM in adults. Among adults with SAIM, 38% had hypertensive vascular diseases or history of bowel ischemia. Two of the
reported cases had mesenteric vessel thrombosis, which was confirmed by microscopic pathology examination of mesentery . However, the
ischemia theory does not explain SAIM in adults with no vascular diseases. It also does not explain the preservation of the mucosa, which is
more sensitive to ischemia than the muscularis propria. On gross pathology examination, bowel segments with SAIM usually have a very thin,
paper-like wall. Other gross features that might be associated with SAIM include perforation, ulceration, and diverticulosis. However,
evaluation of bowel wall might be difficult in areas with perforation. Therefore, meticulous gross examination of bowel wall throughout the
resected bowel segment is essential. Thinned wall might be easier to appreciate in segments adjacent to the perforated area. On microscopic
examination, there will be a gradual or abrupt loss of the circular as well as the longitudinal layer of the muscularis propria.
Approximately 50% of cases had loss of nerve plexuses in areas lacking muscularis propria. No loss of mucosa, submucosa, and serosa is
associated with this condition. Inflammation and mesenteric vessel thrombosis are unusual . Cases with SAIM are usually treated with
surgical resection of the involved segment. As the incidence of the disease is not known, it is difficult to predict the prognosis of SAIM.
However, no recurrences of intestinal perforation have been reported. Mortality was reported in only one case, in which the patient died two
days postoperatively as a result of pulmonary edema . In our case, the patient was a 64-year-old female, the same age and gender as the
first reported case of SAIM in adults. The patient did not have evidence of vascular diseases. She presented with spontaneous intestinal
perforation and had hemicolectomy. She developed postoperative complications secondary to anastomotic leak, but she did not have a
recurrence of intestinal perforation. Microscopic examination of the descending colon showed SAIM and inflammation. No loss of nerves was
noted, as opposed to 50% of the described cases. The patient’s family history of osteogenesis imperfecta made us consider the possibility of
undiagnosed underlying connective tissue disease that affected the vascular supply to intestinal musculature. However, we do not have
evidence to support that possibility. The etiology of SAIM in this case remains mysterious. In summary, segmental absence of muscularis
propria is a rare entity with unknown etiology. The disease can present in pediatric as well as in adult populations. Thorough gross and
microscopic examination of bowel segment is essential for diagnosis. Pathologists should be aware that this entity is segmental and keep a
high index of suspicion when evaluating bowel resections, especially in cases of intestinal obstruction or perforation. The authors would
like to thank Caryn Cooper for her technical assistance. Gross picture of colonic segment with loss of muscularis propria. (A, B) Full
colonic wall section adjacent to perforation showing abrupt loss of muscularis propria with preservation of mucosa. Intact nerve in the area
of loss of muscularis propria. Section through the perforation site showing acute inflammation and abrupt loss of muscularis propria.
Uninvolved bowel segment with preserved muscularis propria. Summary of cases of SAIM in adults. Tamai et al. described seven cases of SAIM
in four females and three males with the age range of 44–89 years. The authors did not specify the age or the sex of the individual
patients.
