Supplemental Digital Content is available in the text Meckel diverticulum (MD) is the most common congenital abnormality of gastrointestinal
tract. Tough believed to occur in 2% of population, most of them remain veiled because majority are clinically asymptomatic and remain
obscure in radiological examination. A 26-year-old male with episodic black colored stool since last 10 years. Tough symptomatic, diagnosis
of pathological lesion, and the bleeding site could not be established with any of the sophisticated diagnostic technique. After 10 years,
it was finally diagnosed as MD with careful observation of bowel loops on computed tomography enterography (CTE) where remnant of vitelline
vessel and hyper-enhancing nodule are seen along the wall of diverticular loop. The patient underwent robot assisted laparoscopic surgery
with excision of diverticular loop. To the best of our knowledge, this robot-assistant Meckel diverculectomy is probably the first reported
surgical procedure in PubMed. Follow-up for 3 month showed no complication or recurrence. Every case is unique and we must be aware and
remain alert in tracing the possible morphological variation of the case. Here, we present one unique but rare feature of MD, which helped
us in making diagnosis. Meckel diverticulum (MD) is a congenital anomaly of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. It occurs due to failure of
complete obliteration of vitello-intestinal duct (VID). Tough believed to occur in 2% of population, most of them remain veiled unless any
complication occurs. GI bleeding is the most common complication seen with the MD. Most of them remain obscure with conventional
radiological test, and it is also hard to trace out with upper GI endoscopy and colonoscopy. Angiography could be positive in case of active
bleeding, and enteroscopy could be other sensitive method. In uncomplicated cases, nuclear imaging is thought to be the most sensitive test
to diagnose MD because majority of cases are positive for gastric type mucosa within the diverticulum. Here, we present one unique case of
MD treated with robot-assisted diverticulectomy. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of MD excised using robot-
assisted diverculectomy in Pubmed. We also discuss other possible techniques to help make diagnosis and share some images to strengthen the
understanding of MD. A 26-year-old male was admitted to our hospital (The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University) with complain
of black tarry stool for 1 month. He complained of past history of similar symptoms since last 10 years and was episodic. The 1st time he
presented with black stool was on 2006. He then went to local hospital, where upper GI endoscopy was done, but no significant positive signs
for black stool were found. The symptoms were relieved with some medicine, which the patient does not remember and was discharged from
hospital. Similar symptoms recurred in 2007 and again in 2010. Every time, just the symptomatic treatment was done and then the patient was
discharged home. On August 2011, capsule endoscopy was performed to rule out the intestinal cause of GI bleeding. It showed diffused
hyperemic mucosa in terminal ileum, but no obvious erosion/ulceration or bleeding site was seen. Inflammation of terminal ileum was
suggested, but the actual diagnosis was not made. On 2013, the patient again presented with black stool. Upper GI endoscopy was done again
and it showed nonatrophic gastritis. Since no ulcer or any source of bleeding detected, enteroscopy was planned. On double balloon
enteroscopy (DBE), large amount of dark red fluid and blood clots like materials were seen in small intestine. Concerning the severity of
the bleeding, emergency digital subtraction angiography was done, where no active extravasation of the contrast medium was seen in bowel
loop. As before, just the symptomatic treatment was prescribed and discharged home. On 2015, the patient again presented with black stool.
Colonoscopy and DBE was done and all the bowel mucosa was visualized, but no abnormality detected except small localized hyperemia in the
ileum. Computed tomography enterography (CTE) scan was also performed and no significant positive finding detected. Again just the
symptomatic treatment was prescribed and then discharged home. On January 2016, the patient presented with similar episode again, and then
he referred to our hospital for further evaluation. At the time of admission he did not had active GI bleeding or black stool and no other
associated symptoms. Physical examination was normal. Laboratory examinations showed all parameters within normal limits. Stool test for RBC
and occult blood was also negative. On CTE scan with neutral oral contrast agent, loop of normal appearing bowel is seen. In the arterial
phase, 1 normal appearing bowel (near ileum) showed high attenuated blood vessel along a small segment of a bowel wall (Fig. 1). Also the
wall in some region is seen thicker than the rest of the bowel wall and a hyper-attenuated nodule is seen at the tip of the blind loop (Fig.
2). On Careful observation the loop is seen extending out from ileum and ends as a blind loop. He was further advised to do positron
emission tomography–computed tomography (PET/CT) and barium meal. On barium study, a small outpouching from ileum is seen (Fig. 3). PET/CT
using technetium-99m pertechnetate showed high uptake in stomach and physiological excretion in urinary bladder, but the diverticular lesion
did not showed any uptake (Fig. 4). 3-D reconstruction image showed a diverticular loop originating from ileum, and a prominent branch of
blood vessel from superior mesenteric artery is seen supplying the diverticulum (Fig. 5). Axial view of abdomen showing blind loop of
diverticulum (arrow head) at right iliac region. The wall showed avid enhancement in compare to other bowel. A prominent blood vessel
(arrow) is seen along the wall of diverticular loop. Sagittal view of abdomen showing blind loop of diverticulum (arrow head) originated
from ileum. A hyper attenuated nodule (arrow) is seen at the tip of the diverticular loop. Barium study showing small intestine, cecum, and
colon. Outpouching of a blind loop is seen (arrow head) originating from terminal ileum (I). Positron emission tomography–computed
tomography (PET/CT) dynamic imaging demonstrating persistent focus of technetium-99 m pertechnetate (radiotracer) uptake in stomach and its
high activity in bladder following renal excretion. No uptake of tracer is seen in any other bowel. 3-D reconstruction image showing a
diverticular loop (black arrow head) originating from ileum (I) and prominent branch of blood vessel (white arrow head) from superior
mesenteric artery (arrow) is seen supplying the diverticulum. The patient underwent robot-assisted abdominal laparotomy (Video 1). A 6 cm-
long diverticulum was seen at the antimesenteric border of ileum. Small blood vessel surrounded by fibrous band was seen along the outer
wall of the diverticulum, it was originated from mesentery and extended up to the tip of diverticulum. The base of the diverticulum was 2 cm
wide and was slightly edematous. The tip of the diverticulum was hard but no attachment with surrounding tissues or abdominal wall seen. The
diverticulum was excised at the base by the Endo-GIA stapler and sutured strongly. Frozen section during the surgery showed no mitosis or
atypical cell. On postsurgical histopathological examination, fundus type gastric glands and pancreatic tissue were seen in submucosal,
muscular, and serosal layers (Fig. 6). It was diagnosed as MD with ectopia of gastric mucosa and pancreatic tissue. The postoperative course
of the patient was uneventful and the patient was discharged 7 days after the surgery. No any complication or recurrence was noted during 3
months’ follow-up. This study was approved by the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University Institutional Review Board. Written
consent for this case report was obtained from the patient. Histopathological specimen showing heterotopic pancreas tissue (A) and
heterotopic gastric glands (C) in submucosal, muscular, and serosal layers. High-power field showing prominent pancreatic tissue (B) and
gastric gland (D). MD is the remnant of the prenatal yolk stalk (VID). Embryologically, the omphalomesenteric tract contains 3 structures:
the vitelline duct, vein, and 2 arteries. VID involutes during 5 to 7 weeks of intrauterine life so do the vitelline arteries. Failure of
complete obliteration of VID can result in remnants, called MD. Among the right and left vitelline arteries, the left involutes whereas the
right persist as superior mesenteric artery and it terminally supplies the diverticulum. Anomalies of the vitelline circulation are less
common, the remnant vitelline artery have been reported in 8% to 15% of cases of MD. Rarely, remnant of vitelline artery in absence of MD is
also possible. The remnants manifest as peritoneum covered fibrous bands which extent from ileal branch of superior mesenteric artery either
to a MD (mesodiverticular band) or to the anterior abdominal wall at the umbilicus. These bands may be completely patent, segmentally
patent, or not patent. Our case describes a rare case of MD with mesodiverticular band and remnant of patent vitelline artery within the
band. It is located in the distal ileum and is usually 60 to 100 cm away from the ileocecal valve. Embryologically, vitelline duct is made
up of pluripotent cell lining, therefore may harbor multiple type of other tissue within the true diverticular loop. The commonest ectopic
tissue found within MD is gastric mucosa, less commonly ectopic pancreatic or duodenal mucosa is present. In our case, both the fundus type
gastric gland and pancreatic tissue is seen in the diverticular loop. The reported incidence of ectopic mucosa in MD varies; a higher
incidence is reported in patients who present with GI hemorrhage (55%–100%) and in pediatric patients (61%). Prevalence of MD is believed to
be approximately 2% of general population, with 3 to 5 times higher prevalence in male than female. Among them, majority remained
asymptomatic, only 4% cases are symptomatic and are usually seen secondary to development of complications. Gastrointestinal bleeding (28%)
is the most common complication of MD, followed by intussusception (13%), obstruction (11%), and perforation (11%). Other complication such
as strangulation, diverticulitis, volvulus, internal hernia, and neoplasm is also reported. Symptoms are often present among children below
2 years of age, the risk will decrease with increasing age. But our case was a 26 year male and he had a GI bleeding since age of 16.
Hemorrhage is the most common complication of MD and is believed to occur due to embryonic remnant of gastric and pancreatic mucosa in the
diverticulum. Secretion of acid from gastric remnant and alkaline juice from pancreatic remnant leads to ulceration in the adjacent ileal
mucosa. In rare instant, mechanical stimulation could also be the cause of erosion and ulceration. Tumors in MD may cause bleeding. Benign
tumors (leiomyoma, lipoma, vascular, and neurovascular hamartoma) or malignant tumors (carcinoids, mesenchymal tumors, adenocarcinoma, small
round cell tumor) all can complicate with MD bleeding. Other causes of melena must also be ruled out. Often, the 1st approach is to use
endoscopy to look for obvious signs of upper GI bleeding. For lower GI bleeding, colonoscopy is often the 1st choice. Our case underwent
upper GI endoscopy for many times and the colonoscopy was done once, but the cause of bleeding was not found. Targeted red blood cell scan
and mesenteric angiogram can also be used to detect the source of bleeding in case of normal endoscopy and colonoscopy findings. With
mesenteric angiography, active extravasation of contrast medium into the bowel can only reliably be seen when blood loss exceeds
0.5 mL/minute. In contrast imaging using technetium-99m labeled red blood cells can identify hemorrhage at rates as low as 0.1 mL/minute. In
our case, digital subtraction angiography was done once when abundant blood and blood clot like material is seen in enteroscopy, but the
site of active bleeding could not be seen on angiography. DBE and wireless capsule endoscopy (WCE) is an alternative to angiography or
scintigraphy in the investigation of obscure GI bleeding. Although the sensitivity of WCE in detecting an MD is not well established, there
are several reports of WCE successfully identifying an MD as a source of GI hemorrhage. Some authors claiming higher sensitivity and
specificity of WCE for the diagnosis of MD-related obscure GI bleeding, whereas other claim DBE and single-balloon enteroscopy are
excellent. In our case, WCE was done once in 2011 and DBE was done on 2013 but neither of the modality helped to find the source of GI
bleeding and the presence of MD. It could be for there was no active bleeding at the time of examination. Radiology plays a variable role in
the diagnosis of MD. Thought different imaging modality available, radiological diagnosis of an MD is still a challenge. Plain radiographs
are not usually helpful in making the diagnosis of an MD. They may be normal or show nonspecific signs in case of complications. Barium
study can be helpful. The characteristic appearance of an MD is a saccular structure attached to the antimesenteric border of distal ileum.
But it is never the 1st choice in the case of complicated cases with GI bleeding and acute abdominal pain and overall sensitivity of
contrast studies in detecting an MD varies. Ultrasound offers a noninvasive and radiation free procedure with dynamic information. Several
sonographic features suggestive of MD have been described, but none of them are specific. The sonographic appearances of MD depend on the
complications then the primary lesion. Thus, ultrasound is not much helpful in making diagnosis of an MD, but it can guide surgeons, whether
surgical or conservative management to be employed. CT appearances of MD usually resemble a normal bowel loop. Complications will determine
the CT appearance. Inflammation appears as a thick-walled loop of bowel with associated inflammatory change in the surrounding mesentery,
but normal appendix. Hemorrhage from an MD using CT angiography has been reported while conventional angiography was negative. If a lesion
is suspected in small bowel and conventional CT showed no abnormality, CT enteroclysis/enterography (CTE) could be diagnostic. CTE has a
combine advantages of assessing the mucosa and lumen along with the assessment of extra-luminal pathology. This techniques have been used to
successfully identify an MD. Here, we diagnosed the case on CTE, remnant of vitelline duct was seen along with prominent blood vessel and
irregularly thickened bowel wall in the arterial phase. The artery runs along the wall of the diverticular loop and ends with the closed
loop of Meckel diverticular wall. We also find avid enhancement in the diverticular wall and it represents hypervascular mass. The
hypervascular mass in MD could be pancreatic tissue, neuroendocrine tumor, or GIST. Pancreatic tissue is found in the postsurgical
histopathological report of our case. Nuclear medicine studies (Tc-99m pertechnetate scan, known as Meckel scan) remain one of the most
specific diagnostic tests in MD. Ectopic gastric mucosa within an MD is seen with scintigraphy due to the uptake of technetium-99m
pertechnetate by mucus secretory cells. The sensitivity of scintigraphy could be improved by the use of H2 antagonists, pentagastrin, or
glucagon. The common cause of negative Meckel scan could be absence of gastric mucosa or could be due to absence of specific cell within the
abundant gastric mucosa that uptakes pertechnetate, thus showing no appreciable uptake on scintigraphy. In our case, ectopic gastric mucosa
is shown to be present on histological report but the scintigraphy showed negative uptake. It could be due to absence of the specific cell
that has high uptake of pertechnetate. Compare to open surgery, laparoscopic surgery is believed to be safer, feasible, with improved
outcome, shorter hospital stay, and reduce cost. Laparoscopically, excision of the MD could be treated by using endostaplers, or
extracorporeal bowel segment resection. Segmental bowel resection is preferred if the base of diverticulum is broad (≧2 cm), inflamed, or in
case of bleeding ulcer. Furthermore, surgeon must be extra cautious to handle the special case like ours where there is patent vitelline
artery along the wall of the bowel. Hemorrhagic complication could be life threating if the diverticulum with patent vitelline artery is
resection inadvertently. Despite all the risk factors, our case underwent robot-assisted diverculectomy using Endo-GIA stapler for the 1st
time in our hospital, and it was successfully conduction with no complication. Robot-assisted diverculectomy had been practiced to treat
bladder, esophageal, and calyceal diverticulum, but probably this is 1st case reported to treat MD with robot-assisted diverculectomy.
Compare to plain film, ultrasound, and noncontrast CT, contrast studies of the small bowel can have higher sensitivity in diagnosing
diverticulum; however, this is never a first choice in complicated abdominal cases. Technetium-99m pertechnetate scintigraphy is believed to
be most sensitive test in the diagnosis of MD. Mesenteric angiography performed for GI bleeding could show negative result in case of
inactive bleeding. WCE and DBE is a newer technique and can be useful in selected patients. Thus, sensitivity and specificity of individual
test varies according to the clinical and morphological variations. Therefore, it is advisable to do multiple tests. Careful observation of
every possible morphological variations and radiological diagnostic sign is mandatary to make diagnosis with high accuracy. Newer technique
like robot-assisted diverculectomy could be safe and feasible treatment modality despite some risk factors. Abbreviations: CTE = computed
tomography enterography, DBE = double balloon enteroscopy, GI = gastrointestinal, MD = Meckel diverticulum, VID = vitello-intestinal duct,
WCE = wireless capsule endoscopy. Vedio1. Meckel's diverticulum treated with robot-assisted diverculectomy. This work was supported by the
National Natural Science Fund of China. The fund number is 813502437, and Medical youth training project of Sun Yat-Sen University, the fund
number is 13ykpy11. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Supplemental Digital Content is available for this article.
