Correspondence to Dr. Kenji Inoue, inouelsbm@gmail.com A healthy teenage Japanese girl was admitted to our hospital after experiencing out-
of-hospital cardiac arrest. She had attempted to commit suicide by taking 4,950 mg of disopyramide and 12 mg of flunitrazepam. Mechanical
cardiopulmonary support was started with percutaneous cannulation of the femoral vessels. Several days later, a blood culture tested
positive for Staphylococcus aureus. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a large mobile and solid mass attached to the apical part of the
left ventricle. To the best of our knowledge, the anatomical location of a pedunculated mass originating from the apex is a rare condition.
Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) can maintain hemodynamic stability in the absence of an intrinsic cardiac rhythm
or effective cardiac output and provide excellent mechanical circulatory support in such urgent or emergent situations. VA-ECMO has been
shown to be effective in patients with secondary cardiac failure due to drug overdose (1,2). Although VA-ECMO is a strong tool in such
patients, several complications, including infection, can occur. We herein report the rare appearance of a vegetation in a patient treated
with VA-ECMO. A healthy teenage Japanese girl was admitted to our hospital after experiencing out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. She had
attempted to commit suicide by taking 4,950 mg of disopyramide and 12 mg of flunitrazepam, which was prescribed to her mother (she was
diagnosed with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation). Her friend discovered her unconscious and not breathing. Effective cardiopulmonary
resuscitation was promptly commenced, and a laryngeal mask was inserted by paramedics. The patient was then transported to our hospital. On
admission, her initial cardiac rhythm was cardiac arrest. She was intubated, and sinus rhythm with wide QRS was restored after the
administration of adrenaline 3 mg and atropine 1 mg as adjuvants. A large-volume gastric lavage followed by activated charcoal was performed
to eliminate the drugs. Despite medical therapy with intravenous catecholamine, her cardiac function deteriorated with the left ventricular
ejection fraction decreasing to 13%. To provide mechanical cardiopulmonary support, the patient was cannulated for VA-ECMO into the right
femoral artery (17 Fr cannula) and vein (21 Fr cannula) percutaneously using the Seldinger technique. An intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP)
and catheter for continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF) and direct hemoperfusion were introduced into the left femoral artery and left internal
jugular vein, respectively. The activated clotting time was maintained at 150-200 seconds. Subsequently, the electrocardiography (ECG)
improved to narrowing of the QRS complexes. The next day, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed that her cardiac function had
gradually improved without any valvular abnormalities (Fig. 1A). Intensive cardiac support was effective, and the patient's cardiac function
recovered. However, a fever developed (38.3°C) on the 3rd hospital day. After the patient was weaned from VA-ECMO, the femoral artery and
venous cannulae were surgically removed and the cannulation sites were repaired. The IABP and catheter for continuous CHDF were also
removed. Blood cultures were subsequently performed, and vancomycin was administered. After obtaining the blood culture results, which were
positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), we switched the antibiotic to cefazolin. Despite intravenous
antibiotics, the fever persisted and the C-reactive protein level and white blood cell count increased to 28.95 mg/dL and 17,200/μL,
respectively. Ten days later, TTE showed a large mobile and solid mass attached to the apical part of the left ventricular apex without any
valvular abnormalities (Fig. 1B). A diagnosis of endocarditis associated with sepsis due to S. aureus, and an oscillating intracardiac mass
documented by an echocardiogram was made according to the modified Duke's criteria (3). Gentamicin was subsequently added as a standard
therapy of infectious endocarditis, and the patient underwent urgent surgery (Fig. 2A). A pedunculated mass originating from the apex of the
left ventricle was exposed and excised with a substantial portion of the normal myocardium (Fig. 2B). After the operation, the patient was
treated for 4 weeks with intravenous antibiotics (2 weeks of vancomycin (2 g/day), and 2 weeks of cefazolin (4 g/day) and gentamicin (180
mg/day), which were suitable for methicillin-sensitive S. aureus after the pathologic specimen confirmed S. aureus) and had an excellent
clinical response. Transthoracic echocardiogram. A: A parasternal long-axis view on the 2nd hospital day. B: A parasternal long-axis view
showing a large vegetation attached to the apical part of the left ventricle. A: The arrow shows a vegetation that developed from the left
ventricular endocardium. The arrowhead shows the mitral valve. B: Macroscopic findings of the 3 cm long vegetation. Bleeding, hemolysis, and
infection are common complications that contribute to VA-ECMO-related morbidity and mortality. The overall infection rates in temporary
mechanical circulatory support are as high as 30-40% (3). Immobilization, a poor nutritional status, and indwelling catheters and tubes are
all likely to contribute to the high incidence of infection. The risk of endocarditis is largely confined to patients with prolapse,
thickened valve leaflets (>5 mm), and mitral regurgitation (4). We considered three important factors in the development of vegetation at
the apex of the left ventricle. The first factor is endothelial damage. A healthy cardiac endothelium is generally resistant to frequent
bacteremia caused by daily activities (5). Endothelial damage at the apex increases a patient's risk of developing bacteremia. Sepsis itself
(direct bacterial activity, particularly from S. aureus) also causes endothelial damage (6). The second factor is arrest time. The arrest
time was around 8 minutes in this case. Endothelial damage can occur after as little as 8 minutes of ischemic duration. The apex is easily
injured when the coronary flow is decreased because it is in a peripheral area. The third factor is circulation using VA-ECMO, especially in
patients with cardiac arrest. VA-ECMO allows gas exchange and hemodynamic support while the blood is pumped from the venous system close to
the right atrium on the atrial side (femoral artery). Therefore, during cardiac arrest, little blood flow reaches the left ventricle, which
makes it easy to form a vegetation in the left ventricle. The vegetation formed in the apex of the left ventricle in our patient.
Prophylactic antibiotics are not always administered prior to cannulation in urgent cases, as the focus is on saving the patient's life.
Additionally, the patient was afebrile 2 days after cannulation. The administration of antibiotics should be considered in cases in which
repeat cannulation is required. In conclusion, we herein reported a patient with infective endocarditis in which a vegetation formed at the
apex of the left ventricle. Our findings showed that prophylactic antibiotics should be administered to patients treated with VA-ECMO.
