A 69‐year‐old woman visited our hospital complaining of right chest pain. Chest computed tomography showed a 55 × 45 mm tumor in the right
upper lobe. Bronchoscopy revealed displaced anomalous B 1 and B 2 +3 arising from the right main bronchus, and the patient was diagnosed
with lung adenocarcinoma by transbronchial lung biopsy from the displaced B 2 +3. Three‐dimensional computed tomography with multiplanar
reconstruction revealed a displaced anomalous B 1 and B 2 +3 branching directly from the right main bronchus, respectively, and abnormal
distribution of the aberrant pulmonary vein (V 2) descended dorsally to the right main bronchus and emptied into the left atrium.
Video‐assisted right upper lobectomy with nodal dissection was successfully performed. Attention should be paid to the anomalous bronchus
and pulmonary vessels for safer lung cancer operations, especially for video‐assisted thoracic surgery. With the widespread use of
bronchoscopy and the remarkable progress of recent three‐dimensional‐computed tomography (3DCT), identification of bronchial abnormalities
has become quite common, while variant pulmonary veins are relatively rare.1 Preoperative recognition of anomalous bronchi or pulmonary
vessels is very important for a safe operation, because anatomical variations can cause difficulty, especially in video‐assisted thoracic
surgery (VATS). This report documents the surgical case of a 69‐year‐old woman suffering from lung cancer who demonstrated an anomalous
bronchi (B1 and B2 +3) branching from the right main bronchus and whose pulmonary vein (V2) independently drained directly into the left
atrium. To the best of our knowledge, six reported cases of lung cancer, including the present case, have been associated with this type of
pulmonary vein anomaly. This report profiles the third case accompanied by bronchial variations. A 69‐year‐old woman visited our hospital
complaining of right chest pain. CT showed a pulmonary tumor of 55 × 45 mm in the right upper lobe (Fig 1). Bronchoscopy revealed displaced
anomalous B1 and B2 +3 arising from the right main bronchus, and a transbronchial lung biopsy from the displaced bronchus was diagnosed as
adenocarcinoma. 3DCT with multiplanar reconstruction also revealed displaced anomalous B1 and B2 +3 branching directly from the right main
bronchus (Fig 2), and an abnormal distribution of the aberrant pulmonary vein (V2) descended dorsally to the right main bronchus and emptied
into the left atrium (Fig 3). No abnormal distribution was found in the pulmonary artery. The patient was diagnosed with primary lung
adenocarcinoma (c‐T2bN1M0) located in the right S3 with displaced B1 and B2 +3 and abnormal distribution of the aberrant pulmonary vein. A
video‐assisted right upper lobectomy was performed with a 7 cm access window and three ports. From the anterior aspect of the hilum, V1 +3
without the central vein (V2) was divided using a vascular endostapler. An anomalous vein (V2) was identified behind the right main bronchus
at the posterior aspect of the hilum that independently drained directly into the left atrium and was divided using a vascular endostapler.
The displaced B1, B2 +3, A2, A1 +3, and interlobar fissure were sequentially divided, and the right upper lobe was removed. Hilar and
mediastinal lymph node dissection was performed. The postoperative course was uneventful. Pathological diagnosis was adenocarcinoma with a
maximal diameter of 55 mm with #4R and #12u node metastases (pT2bN2M0). Chest computed tomography shows a 55 × 35 mm tumor in the right
upper lobe. Three‐dimensional computed tomography revealed a displaced anomalous B1 and B2 +3, branching directly from right main bronchus.
Abnormal distribution of the aberrant pulmonary vein (V2) descended dorsally and emptied into the left atrium. (a) Front view; (b) right
side view. (c) V2 (white allow) behind the right main bronchus independently drained directly into the left atrium, observed on
two‐dimensional computed tomography. Recently, VATS has become a widespread procedure among thoracic surgeons as a potential alternative to
conventional thoracotomy because of its clinical benefits, less postoperative pain, and quicker recovery following surgery.2 However, the
vessels, bronchi, and interlobar fissures are dissected using a thoracoscope with less tactile feedback with a two‐dimensional vision, which
occasionally might lead to serious complications, especially in patients with anomalous pulmonary vessels, as bleeding from an unknown
origin could cause a critical situation. Tsuboi et al. reported that one of the causes of conversion to thoracotomy during VATS could be an
anomalous hilar structure, as well as dense pleural adhesion, difficulty in safely dissecting the interlobar pulmonary artery, or bleeding
from vessels.3 Indeed, Asai et al. reported that one of nine right thoracotomy patients with a right upper lobe vein posterior to the
bronchus intermedius suffered venous injury, and the patient's anomalous vein was not identified either preoperatively or intraoperatively.1
They further demonstrated that in 5.7% of the patients studied, the pulmonary vein branch of the right upper lobe posterior to the bronchus
intermedius was observed. According to the five previous case reports with anomalous V2, it was recognized preoperatively in only two
cases.3, 4, 5, 6, 7 Akiba et al. reported the importance of preoperative 3D imaging for a safe operation because variations in pulmonary
vessels can have a serious impact on patients undergoing lung surgery, especially in VATS.8 Moreover, our patient also presented anomalous
bronchi (B1 and B2 +3) branching from the right main bronchus. Although only a few surgical cases of lung cancer with anomalous vein
accompanied by bronchial variations have been reported, as these abnormalities may be complicated, surgeons should pay attention to their
possible presence, not only on preoperative images but also intraoperatively.5, 7 In this case, one of the important factors in a successful
VATS lobectomy is preoperative foreknowledge of anomalous vessels and bronchi. For the safe completion of a VATS lobectomy, a cautious
preoperative evaluation of the anatomical structures, as well as of the tumor itself, to identify any abnormal vascular or bronchial
distribution is essential. No authors report any conflict of interest.
