A documented case of beginning aseptic necrosis of the femoral head associated with pregnancy together with a review of the literature about
this rare complication of pregnancy is presented. The known risk factors of osteonecrosis are; steroid use, alcoholism, organ
transplantation, especially after kidney transplant or bone marrow transplantation bone, systemic lupus erythematosus, dyslipidemia
especially hypertriglyceridemia, dysbaric decompression sickness, drepanocytosis and Gaucher's disease. Among the less established factors,
we mention procoagulations abnormalities, HIV infection, chemotherapy. We report a case of osteonecrosis of femoral head after pregnancy.
Aseptic necrosis, known as avascular necrosis, ischemic necrosis, or osteonecrosis, is a pathological process caused by impaired blood
supply to the affected bone and resulted in the death of osteocytes and bone marrow cells . That induces demineralization, trabecular
thinning, and subsequent collapse of the joint surface with fracture of subchondral bone. The first report was made by Pfeiffer in 1957 . A
clinical diagnosis is made according to the patient's symptoms, physical findings, and imaging results compatible with the disease. In our
patient, all other predisposing factors, apart pregnancy have been excluded. Because until now few cases have been described, little is
known about the evolution and treatment of this disease in association with pregnancy. We report a case. We report a case of 38 year old,
housewife without past medical history. There was no history of steroid usage, alcohol drinking, or trauma. She presented in 2009, during
the third trimester of pregnancy, mechanical pain in the left hip, persistent postpartum, causing walking discomfort. Blood analysis was
normal in postpartum, and radiographs showed the femoral head subtle loss of sphericity (Figure 1). T2-weighted sequence MRI of the femoral
heads showed bilateral joint effusion with focal lesion at the anterior part of the left hip (Figure 2). Symptomatic treatment was
introduced to avoid complications and elective caesarean section was indicated. By the way, she consulted five years ago in our department
for the same but bilateral symptoms, and pain became more severe at left without extra-articular sign. Physical examination revealed a
walking limp, weight at 65 kg, and 167.5 cm for size. There was a pain in left hip flexion with limitation at 100 degrees. Key sign was
positive with positive Patrick's (flexion abduction external rotation) tests especially at left hip. Radiographs showed prominent
osteoarthritis, which is especially at right, with collapse of the articular surface and minimal loss of sphericity at the left femoral
head, compared to the radio after pregnancy (Figure 3). Laboratory tests were normal (ESR at 26 mm/first hour, Rhumatoid Factor and
antinuclear antibodies were negative, Hemoglobin electrophoresis showed; A1 at 97 and A2 at 3, antiphospholipid antibodies were negative,
and normal lipidic analysis). There wasn't any abdominal ultrasound abnormities. Retained diagnosis was aseptic osteonecrosis of the left
femoral head and secondary osteoarthritis at right by hyperpression. Core decompression surgical treatment was suggested, but the patient
wished to receive medical treatment only to date (symptomatic treatment, oral bisphosphonate), associated to shockwaves. The outcome marked
clinical improvement (walk without limping and pain), the radiographs are expected six months after starting treatment. Left femoral heads
subtle loss of sphericity T2-weighted sequence MRI of the femoral heads showed bilateral joint effusion with focal lesion at the anterior
part of the left hip Prominent osteoarthritis, which is bilateral, with collapse of the articular surface and minimal loss of sphericity at
the left femoral head Pregnancy-associated femoral head osteonecrosis is rare. The first complaint is mostly unilateral, sudden or gradually
increasing pain in the groin and radiating to the knee, thigh or back. Physical examination shows a painful limitation of active and passive
movement of the joint, especially with rotation and less pronounced with abduction and flexion. Apart from traumatic forms, the exact causal
link between supporting factors and aseptic necrosis occurrence is often uncertain which is only risk factors, clearly identified, rather
than causes [3, 4]. A quarter to a third of aseptic necrosis is idiopathic, and occurs forty year-old men . However, little is known about
whether pregnancy is an etiological factor in femoral head osteonecrosis. Pregnancy is not considered as a risk factor of the disease or its
recurrence in subsequent pregnancies. This association is a rare situation . In 1999, Montella et al reported the largest known series (13
cases), in all cases of which osteonecrosis affected the left hip and only 4 cases were bilateral. The pathogenetic mechanism of postpartum
osteonecrosis of the femoral head are still controversial and probably multifactorial. Among mechanisms proposed, we found increased
coagulability, mechanical stress, and impaired venous stasis. However, the high estrogen and progesterone production by the placenta can
contribute to the development of osteonecrosis by fatty embolism. Also, the elevated non-protein bound cortisol and glucocorticoid activity
of progesterone can be responsible . The unbound maternal cortisol level is elevated to three times more among pregnant women than
nonpregnant one. The pregnancy-related maternal parathyroid gland hyperplasia with high levels of parathyroid hormone may also contribute.
Ischemia is frequent among pregnant women because pregnancy produces a hypercoagulable state, higher in the third trimester, with an overall
monthly prevalence of 0.01 thrombotic events per 1,000 women . Hypercoagulability may result in thromboembolism of vessels, which leads to
vascular occlusion or venous congestion, and resulting ischemic necrosis of the bone. From the results of current studies, ovulation
induction may be a cause which activate both coagulation and fibrinolytic systems [10, 11]. Mechanical stress induced by excessive weight
gain during pregnancy may be another etiological factor for osteonecrosis of the femoral head . Direct injury to the femoral joint or the
artery in the round ligament by compression of the growing uterus or during a difficult delivery have been mentioned . In our patient, the
biochemical and coagulation parameters showed no abnormalities. There are six stages of aseptic necrosis, with typical clinical and
histological signs in each stage. X-rays and conventional tomography become pathological only in stage 2, often several months after the
onset of clinical symptoms, showing arc-like subchondral radiolucent areas, patchy lucent areas, sclerosis, a ′crescent′ sign and bone
collapse . Other techniques have to be used for early diagnosis: Bone scintigraphy, and resonance magnetic imaging (affected bone as early
as 12-48 hours after the onset of the disease). The best way to treat the pregnant patient is not clear. The early diagnosis and advice are
important. The prognosis after this conservative therapy seems to be good, although secondary degenerative or osteoarthritis changes
eventually require surgical treatment at a later age. Aseptic osteonecrosis of femoral head associated to pregnancy is rare. The early
diagnosis of this condition is important. Pain due to nerve compression will be partly relieved at rest. However, contrary to the pain of
aseptic necrosis, there is an obvious exacerbation of the neuralgic pain during the night. The patients should be treated early and
adequately to prevent secondary degenerative changes in the hip joints in these young women. The authors declare no competing interest. All
authors contributed to the writing and have read and approved the final manuscript.
