We report the case of a 37‐year‐old male non‐small cell lung cancer patient with an active epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation
who received gefitinib as first‐line treatment. After 13.7 months, the patient experienced disease progression and was treated with
platinum‐based doublet chemotherapy plus gefitinib for 5.4 months. A subsequent lung biopsy showed cMET overexpression; therefore, the
patient received a cMET inhibitor with the gefitinib. The response in the different lesions of several organs was diverse. Stable disease
was achieved in the lung lesion; however, the liver metastases enlarged. A liver biopsy found T790M mutation in EGFR exon 20, thus, third
generation EGFR‐tyrosine kinase inhibitors were used and a partial response was achieved. In advanced non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients, the median overall survival (OS) with platinum‐based doublet chemotherapy is less than a year. The introduction of target drugs,
such as gefitinib, erlotinib, afatinib, and crizotinib has achieved survival rates of more than two years in NSCLC patients with driver gene
mutations.1 Beyond progression there is still chance for patients to received targeted treatment, which is determined according to the
resistance mechanism.2 A 37‐year‐old male patient presented to our hospital complaining of a cough that had lasted two months. The patient
had never smoked and had no family history of cancer. His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (PS) score was 1. The right
supraclavicular lymph node could be touched during the physical examination. Positron‐emission tomography‐computed tomography (PET/CT) taken
on 11 September 2012 showed right lower lung cancer with multiple metastases to the bilateral lung, right supraclavicular lymph node, and
liver metastases. A biopsy of the lymph node taken on 15 September 2012 determined adenocarcinoma with an epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) exon 19 mutation, detected by the real time‐polymerase chain reaction (RT‐PCR). The diagnosis was cT4N3M1a (lung) stage IV right
lower lung adenocarcinoma. From 26 September 2012 the patient received gefitinib and achieved a partial response (PR). A CT scan taken on 8
November 2013 confirmed progressive disease (PD). The progression‐free survival (PFS) rate was 13.7 months. He was enrolled in the IMPRESS
trial and received six cycles of pemetrexed/cisplatinum chemotherapy with gefitinib from 20 November 2013.3 Stable disease (SD) was
initially achieved; however, PD was confirmed on 3 May 2014 with PFS of 5.4 months. The second biopsy from the primary lesion in the lung
taken on 20 May 2014 showed adenocarcinoma with EGFR exon 19 mutation but no exon 20 mutation, detected by RT‐PCR. Mesenchymal epithelial
transition (MET) immunohistochemistry (IHC) was positive (Fig 1) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was negative. The patient was
enrolled in a clinical trial and treated with cMET inhibitor INC280 plus gefitinib from 12 June 2014. SD was achieved. On 7 October 2014,
the primary lesion in the lung was reduced, while a new lesion appeared in the liver (Fig 2). The PFS was 3.8 months. A biopsy of the liver
tumor was performed on 20 October 2014, which confirmed that the adenocarcinoma had metastasized from the lung, with EGFR exon 20 T790M
mutation detected by RT‐PCR. IHC and FISH of cMET were negative. From 5 January 2015, the patient was enrolled in a third generation
EGFR‐tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) trial (NCT02330367) and was treated with avitinib (AC0010). The patient achieved PR.
Immunohistochemistry of the mesenchymal epithelial transition gene expression. Image evaluation before and after the cMET inhibitor
treatment. In the past, the standard treatment for advanced NSCLC patients has been first‐line platinum‐based doublet chemotherapy and
second‐line chemotherapy. After the introduction of EGFR‐TKIs for NSCLC, patients with EGFR positive mutation have benefitted from longer
PFS than with chemotherapy.1 After the progression of the first‐line EGFR‐TKIs, doublet chemotherapy became the standard treatment,
presenting an opportunity at subsequent biopsy to determine the resistance mechanism.2 The major resistance mechanism was related to the
secondary mutation (T790M) of the EGFR gene at exon 20.4 Another mechanism was cMET alteration, including overexpression, amplification, or
mutation.4 The cMET inhibitor and the third generation EGFR‐TKIs focused on T790M were developed to solve the problem of resistance.5, 6 The
patient in this case received gefitinib as first‐line treatment and achieved PFS of 13.7 months. After progression, he received platinum
doublet chemotherapy, with PFS of 5.4 months. A subsequent lung biopsy showed cMET overexpression. After the patient was administered the
cMET‐inhibitor, a different response was observed between the lung lesion and the liver metastases. A liver biopsy confirmed heterogeneity
between the two sites. A T790M mutation of EGFR exon 20 was found in the liver metastases, which was not found in the lung lesion. The
patient received third generation EGFR‐TKIs focused on the T790M mutation and achieved PR. He received different target therapy drugs
according to the gene alteration during different periods, including gefitinib for the EGFR active mutation, cMET inhibitor for the cMET
overexpression, and third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs for the T790M mutation. The heterogeneity of the tumor was another consideration after the
progression of target therapy.7 A different strategy was required to deal with the different responses to treatment.8 The subsequent biopsy
was helpful to determine the reason for the resistance. After targeted treatment, the patient has now survived more than three years. In
conclusion, we report a case of heterogeneity in the resistance to EGFR‐TKI. A subsequent biopsy can determine the different mechanisms of
different tumor locations, and then targeted treatment toward the driver gene alteration can be administered. No authors report any conflict
of interest. We thank the patient participated in our research and all the doctors including pathologist Li‐Xu Yan who perform the
examination and treatment for the patient.
