Correspondence to Dr.ã€€Hiroshi Mannoji, h.mannoji@gmail.com A 49-year-old female was referred to our hospital due to high serum creatine
kinase (CK) (2,605 IU/L) and serum cardiac troponin T (cTnT) (0.342 ng/mL) levels. She had no other complaints and further examinations
suggested no signs of cardiac disease. Additionally, the serum cardiac troponin I (cTnI) levels were normal. She reported having gradually
felt difficulty in walking upstairs. A biopsy indicated skeletal muscle sarcoidosis with positive staining for cTnT. Steroid therapy
immediately resolved her muscular symptoms with a normalization of the serum CK levels. Since the serum levels of cTnI were normal, the
concomitant measurement of cTnT/cTnI might be useful to diagnose skeletal muscular disease biochemically in such cases. Sarcoidosis is an
inflammatory disease characterized by the presence of noncaseating granulomas in multiple organs, including the lung, skin, eye, liver, and
heart (1). Although muscular involvement is relatively common, isolated skeletal muscular sarcoidosis is reported to be rare (2). Both
cardiac troponin T (cTnT) and I (cTnI) are specific markers of cardiac injury (3). Recent papers, however, have demonstrated that cTnT is
induced in diseased skeletal muscle with Becker muscular dystrophy, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Friedreich's ataxia, inclusion body
myositis, limb girdle muscular dystrophy, myasthenia gravis and myotonic dystrophy (4,5). In the present paper, we report a case of
sarcoidosis with the induction of cTnT in the diseased skeletal muscle without any involvement of the heart. Because several samplings of
serum cTnI were within the normal ranges in this case, the concomitant measurement of cTnT and cTnI might therefore be useful to diagnose
skeletal muscular sarcoidosis biochemically in such cases. A 49-year-old female was referred to our hospital due to high levels of serum
creatine kinase (CK) (2,605 IU/L; normal range: 41-153). She had been treated with ferric medicine for anemia due to uterine fibroids. She
had no episodes of chest discomfort, and her electrocardiogram and echocardiogram findings revealed no abnormalities. Although her serum
levels of cTnT were elevated (0.342 ng/mL; normal range <0.014), as confirmed by two independent assays, the CK-MB and cTnI levels were
within the normal limits without any renal dysfunction, hypothyroidism or other specific findings. Computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging showed no evidence of either coronary arterial lesions, myocardial injury or skeletal muscle injury. Twenty weeks after
her first visit, she gradually began to feel difficulty in walking upstairs. Her manual muscle test (MMT) score was 4/5 in the proximal limb
muscles at this time. An electromyogram on her right bicep showed low voltage and short duration motor unit potentials. Therefore, a biopsy
of her bicep was performed and revealed noncaseating epithelioid granuloma (Fig. 1A), suggesting sarcoidosis. Immunohistochemical staining
for cTnT was positive in the degenerated skeletal muscle (Fig. 1B and D). No evidence of lung, eye or skin lesions was observed by routine
physical and radiographic examinations. Contrast cardiac MRI showed no abnormality in the heart. Whole body positron emission tomography
using fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG-PET) detected an uptake only in the gastrocnemius muscles and no abnormal uptake in the heart or any other
organs. The serum levels of soluble interleukin-2 receptors were slightly elevated, while the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) activity
and lysozyme levels were within the normal limits. Because the patient exhibited symptoms of weakened skeletal muscle and abnormal
histological findings, after excluding other types of skeletal muscle diseases, she was finally diagnosed with isolated skeletal muscular
sarcoidosis, chronic myopathy type. Histological examination of biopsied skeletal muscle samples. Immunohistochemistry procedures were
performed with an established method using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections. The following antibodies were used and diluted as
shown: Cardiac troponin T (cTnT), Cardiac Isoform Ab-1 (Lab Vision Corp., Fremont, USA, Cat. no. # MS-295-P1; 1: 100). To detect bound
antibodies, slides were incubated with antimouse-labeled polymer peroxidase and developed with the HRP/ DAB Detection System [Horseradish
peroxidase/Diaminobenzidine (Dako)] for 2 min. Skeletal myocytes in noncaseating granulomas stained positive for cTnT (arrows) (A, B), as
well as a skeletal myocyte surrounded by inflammatory cells (C, D). Her muscular weakness was accompanied by progressively increasing CK
(5,372 IU/L) and cTnT (0.45 ng/mL; Roche, Mannheim, Germany) levels. Therefore, steroid pulse therapy (intravenous methylprednisolone 1,000
mg/day for 3 days) was administered twice, followed by oral prednisolone (40 mg/day) two weeks later with gradual tapering. Her muscular
symptoms subsequently improved, and the CK (131 IU/L) and cTnT (0.026 ng/mL; Roche) levels also normalized (Fig. 2). Time course of creatine
kinase (CK) and cardiac troponin T (cTnT) in response to steroid therapy. In the present case, the diagnosis of sarcoidosis was
histologically established based on the presence of noncaseating granulomas in the biopsied skeletal muscle. No evidence of any cardiac
involvement was demonstrated by electrocardiogram, echocardiography, cardiac CT, cardiac contrast MRI, or FDG-PET examinations. Because
further examination revealed no sarcoidosis lesions in the lung, skin, eye or liver, the patient was diagnosed with isolated skeletal
muscular sarcoidosis. The elevation of the serum cTnT levels was confirmed by two independent assays in the present patient. The value of
cTnT was 0.257 IU/L according to an electrochemiluminescence immunoassay (Roche) and 0.342 IU/L based on a chemiluminescent enzyme
immunoassay (Wako, Osaka, Japan), both of which were more than 18 times higher than the normal upper limit (<0.014 IU/L). However, the serum
levels of cTnI were not elevated (0.051 IU/L <0.06, Siemens Healthcare, Japan). Due to the fact that cTnI has been shown to be a more
sensitive marker of myocardial injury than cTnT (6), the absence of cTnI elevation suggested that the elevated levels of serum cTnT were not
the result of myocardial damage. Four isoforms of cTnT derived from alternative splicing are known to be expressed in cardiac muscle in a
developmentally regulated manner (7). cTnT isoforms have also been shown to be expressed in fetal human skeletal muscle, while they are
downregulated after birth, leading to the absence of cTnT in healthy adult skeletal muscle (7). Recent studies have demonstrated that cTnT
is reexpressed in diseased skeletal muscle (5). Therefore, the reexpression of cTnT might be a common process observed in regenerating
skeletal muscle after injury. In contrast, cTnI has not been shown to be expressed in skeletal muscle at any point during development (8).
In the present case, cTnI was also negative, despite high levels of cTnT, suggesting that the concomitant measurement of cTnT and cTnI could
therefore distinguish skeletal muscle injury from myocardial damage. In conclusion, we experienced a case of isolated skeletal muscular
sarcoidosis with the induction of cTnT without any involvement of the heart. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of
isolated skeletal muscular sarcoidosis associated with elevated serum cTnT levels and the histological documentation of cTnT. Because the
serum levels of cTnI are often normal in patients presenting with skeletal muscle disease, the concomitant measurement of cTnT and cTnI
might therefore be useful to discriminate cardiac and muscular diseases biochemically.
