Spontaneous coronary artery dissection is a poorly understood phenomenon that usually affects women during pregnancy or the immediate post-
partum period. We present the case of a 60-year-old female with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who presented with vague complaints of
shortness of breath, dizziness, and weakness with a mildly elevated troponin. She denied any anginal symptoms. As part of her initial
workup, a nuclear stress test revealed inferior wall reversible changes. Coronary angiography revealed spontaneous right coronary artery
dissection which was treated with a drug-eluting stent. Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) causes acute coronary syndrome (ACS)
in only 0.1–0.4% of reported cases (1, 2). Based on previously published data, the most commonly affected groups were pregnant females or
those in the immediate post-partum period. SCAD is becoming increasingly recognized in older females presenting with ACS. Patients typically
present with ACS with ST elevation myocardial infarction in 25–50% of the cases and the remainder usually present with non-ST elevation
myocardial infarction (3). Subacute presentations such as that of our patient are rare. We believe highlighting these cases will play an
essential role in increasing physician awareness and lower the suspicion thresholds for SCAD for more effective and timely management. We
present the case of a 60-year-old female with a history of polycythemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) on home oxygen, and
obesity who presented to the emergency room complaining of mild dyspnea on exertion that had been experienced for 3 days. She also reported
a generalized sensation of fatigue with episodes of lightheadedness. She denied any medical history, including autoimmune disease,
connective tissue disorders, or vasculitis. As part of her general workup in the emergency department, she was found to have elevated
troponin levels at 0.182 ng/ml (0.0–0.045 ng/ml). ECG revealed sinus tachycardia; there were no ST segment changes suggestive of ischemia
(Fig. 1). The patient was admitted to the floor and managed as a possible case of COPD exacerbation. Twelve-lead EKG at the time of
emergency department presentation with sinus tachycardia and no acute ST segment changes. A nuclear stress test was performed that revealed
a large inferior wall reversible defect with associated inferior wall hypokinesis. The patient was taken to the cardiac catheterization
suite in a stable state. Coronary angiography of the right coronary showed a spontaneous dissection throughout the mid-right coronary artery
(Fig. 2). The left coronary arterial system was grossly unremarkable. Due to poor distal thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) 1
flow, it was decided to stent the lesion. A Prowater wire was steered toward the mid-right coronary artery which initially went into the
false lumen; we then pulled the wire back and redirected it to the true lumen which was confirmed by the ability to advance the wire into
the distal vessel. A drug-eluting stent was then deployed. Follow-up angiography showed excellent results with complete tacking of the
dissection plane and excellent TIMI 3 flow at the end of the procedure (Fig. 3). Coronary angiography showing a dissection plane throughout
the mid-right coronary artery. Follow-up angiography showing complete tacking of the dissection plane and TIMI 3 flow. SCAD is a rare
condition and the underlying mechanism is not fully understood. While a few of the reported cases have been called idiopathic, a predisposed
arterial disease or underlying cause has been identified in most of the cases (3). Intimal tear or bleeding of vasa vasorum with intramedial
hemorrhage has been proposed (4). Younger females in the pregnancy and peri-partum periods are thought to be at a higher risk than the
general population which is believed to be secondary to increased hemodynamics during labor and delivery, and possibly hormonal effect on
the arterial walls affecting the tunica media (5, 6). Eosinophilic inflammatory infiltrates in adventitia of coronaries with dissection has
been described. It is unclear whether this inflammatory reaction is reactive or causative of dissection by weakening the coronary
architecture (5). Other etiologies for SCAD include fibromuscular dysplasia which is commonly seen (7). Connective tissue disorders such as
Ehler–Danlos type IV and Marfans have also been implicated in SCAD (8, 9). Our patient did not have any clinical features usually associated
with such connective tissue diseases. This case is unique because our patient had an atypical presentation of SCAD. She is an elderly female
presenting with symptoms initially thought to be suggestive of a COPD exacerbation with a troponin elevation secondary to a supply–demand
mismatch. This presentation serves as a reminder to include SCAD in the differential diagnosis even among elderly patients with
comorbidities presenting with unexplained troponin elevation. Management of SCAD is conservative when clinically possible (5). Other
management strategies have been proposed in the literature ranging from percutaneous coronary interventions to heart transplantation.
Revascularization in SCAD is challenging and should be considered in patients with ongoing ischemia (10). Intravenous ultrasound (IVUS) may
be helpful in confirming the diagnosis. In our patient, IVUS was not used due to her narrow lumen coronaries with a concern of possible
worsening of the dissection with the bulky IVUS catheter. None of the authors have any financial or personal bias that would inappropriately
compromise the publication of this work. The authors have not received any funding or benefits from industry or elsewhere to conduct this
study.
