Correspondence to Dr.　Kenji Sekiguchi, sekiguch@med.kobe-u.ac.jp We herein present two cases of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
following vaccination against human papilloma virus (HPV). Case 1 experienced diplopia and developed an unstable gait 14 days after a second
vaccination of Cervarix. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an isolated small, demyelinating lesion in the pontine tegmentum.
Case 2 experienced a fever and limb dysesthesia 16 days after a second vaccination of Gardasil. Brain MRI revealed hyperintense lesion in
the pons with slight edema on a T2-weighted image. Both cases resolved completely. It is important to accumulate further data on confirmed
cases of ADEM temporally associated with HPV vaccination. Cervical cancer is associated with considerable morbidity in young adolescent
women in Japan. Persistent infection of the cervix with some oncogenic subtypes of human papilloma virus (HPV) causes cancer. Thus,
vaccination against high-risk oncogenic HPV infection before the first sexual experience may reduce morbidity by approximately 70%. The
World Health Organization has recommended worldwide HPV vaccination to prevent the majority of cervical cancers (1). Several cases of young
females presenting with central nervous system (CNS) demyelination following the administration of HPV vaccine have been reported thus far
(2). We herein present the first two cases of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) following vaccination against HPV in Japan. A
16-year-old Japanese girl had received a bivalent HPV vaccine (CervarixⓇ, 0.5 mL intramuscularly) during a school program. She had a
previous medical history of bronchial asthma in her childhood, but had not received any treatment for this condition. The second vaccination
was administered 33 days after the first injection on the same limb. The patient felt discomfort in her visual field 14 days after the
second vaccination. She became aware of double vision and dizziness on the next day, followed by instability while walking. Nineteen days
after the second vaccination, she was referred to our neurological outpatient clinic. Her neurological examination revealed complete
alertness, bilateral medial longitudinal fasciculus syndrome, left facial sensation decrease, and mild left facial paresis. The
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was acellular, with normal sugar and protein levels and IgG index (59 mg/dL, 38 mg/dL, and 0.44, respectively) and
there was no evidence of oligoclonal IgG bands (OCB). However, the myelin basic protein level was elevated (440 ng/mL; normal <102 ng/mL).
Electrophysiological studies, such as those for somatosensory evoked potentials, auditory brainstem responses, and visual evoked potentials,
showed no significant abnormalities. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an isolated small, demyelinating lesion in the pontine
tegmentum on T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images. The lesion was not enhanced by contrast agent (Fig. 1). According
to these findings, the patient was diagnosed with post-vaccination ADEM and administered methylprednisolone 1,000 mg/day intravenously for 3
days. Her visual function improved after treatment and the double vision resolved within a week. The abnormal brainstem lesion ascertained
by MRI was normalized 80 days after vaccination. She was left with no residual neurological deficit and did not receive the third dose of
the vaccine. No clinical relapse was observed over the 2-year follow-up period. MRI of the brain on admission in Case 1. A: T2-weighted
image. B: Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image. C: A diffusion-weighted image revealed an isolated small high intensity lesion
in the pontine tegmentum. D: A T1-weighted image showed no apparent abnormalities. A 15-year-old previously healthy Japanese girl had
received the first dose of a quadrivalent HPV vaccine (GardasilⓇ, 0.5 mL intramuscularly) through a school program. The second vaccination
was administered 77 days after the first vaccination on the same limb. Sixteen days after the second vaccination, she suffered from a fever,
headache, and polyarthralgia with swelling of the extremities for 1 week. Serum IgM anti-cytomegalovirus antibody was present, but no
abnormal neurological signs were evident in the pediatric clinic. She did not receive any specific treatment, and her headache and
dysesthesia in the limbs persisted for 2 weeks after the fever diminished. In the third week, she visited a neurological clinic and brain
MRI studies showed a hyperintense lesion in the pons with slight edema on a T2-weighted image and diffusion-weighted images (Fig. 2). Forty
days after the second vaccination, the patient was referred to our neurological outpatient clinic. Her neurological examination was normal
and reevaluation of brain MRI revealed that the pontine hyperintense lesion had completely diminished. She did not receive the third dose of
the vaccine. Clinical relapse was not observed over the 2-year follow-up period. MRI of the brain in Case 2. A: T2-weighted image. B: FLAIR
image. C: A diffusion-weighted image revealed a hyperintense lesion in the pons with slight edema. D: Sagittal T2-weighted imaging of the
brainstem showed the lesion existed on the pontine midline. The lesion finally diminished without any treatment. Multivalent HPV vaccines
are generally administered three times, with the second and the third injections at 1-2 months and 6 months, respectively, after the first
injection. The quadrivalent HPV vaccine Gardasil is widely used in many countries, whereas the bivalent HPV vaccine Cervarix was first
introduced in Japan. Thirteen cases concerning CNS demyelinating adverse effects associated with HPV vaccination have been reported
previously (Table). However, nine of these were finally diagnosed as multiple sclerosis or neuromyelitis optica (3). The prevalence of
multiple sclerosis in Western countries is approximately 10 times higher than that in Asian countries (4). The targeted age of nationwide
voluntary HPV immunization programs conducted in Australia and other countries is consistent with the age group susceptible to multiple
sclerosis (5). Previously Reported Cases of ADEM Occurring after HPV Vaccination. NMOSD: neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder, IVMP:
intravenous methyl prednisolone, IVCY: intravenous cyclophosphamide However, it has been noted that the molecular structure of aquaporin 4
resembles L1 virus-like particles contained in the HPV vaccine, and the influence of novel immunostimulatory adjuvant AS04 may have a role
in CNS demyelinating adverse events (6,7). Generally, the onset of autoimmune disorders is triggered by infectious conditions for
genetically susceptible individuals. Therefore, vaccination may also stimulate the immune system in susceptible young women. However, recent
pooled analyses of large-scale and long-term safety data have revealed no evidence of an increased risk of autoimmune disease associated
with HPV vaccination (7,8). The proposed criteria for pediatric ADEM are multifocal, large (1-2 cm each) lesions identified by brain MRI and
behavioral changes or alteration of consciousness (9). There are no standardized descriptions of ADEM for adult patients; however,
consciousness is not necessarily impaired and infratentorial lesions are more frequently identified in both young and elderly adults (10).
Cerebral lesions are typically disseminated; however, solitary lesions occur in approximately 10-30% of all cases (11). The differential
diagnosis from multiple sclerosis is determined by a clinical course with no relapse and the absence of any oligoclonal IgG bands in the CSF
(9). In our cases, OCB were not detected; nonetheless, elevated myelin basic protein levels were observed, suggesting that acute central
demyelinating changes occurred. Clinical relapse was not observed over the 2-year follow-up period in both cases. The median interval from
the onset of the initial demyelinating symptom to the second neurological episode in multiple sclerosis has been reported to be two years
(12). Patients with monofocal symptoms without asymptomatic MRI abnormalities have a relatively low risk for later meeting the criteria for
multiple sclerosis than patients with multifocal asymptomatic lesions (13). A previous confirmed report of adverse effects in the CNS
associated with HPV vaccination in Japan described the case of a pediatric patient diagnosed with acute cerebellar ataxia (14). No obvious
MRI abnormality was observed in that case. The annual incidence of ADEM is 0.8 per 100,000 individuals, of which 5% is believed to be post-
vaccination ADEM (11). Post-vaccination ADEM is an unavoidable complication and 0.1-0.2 per 100,000 vaccinated individuals develop ADEM
(15). At the end of March 2014, 7 million doses of Cervarix and 1.9 million doses of Gardasil were administered to more than 3.7 million
individuals as part of the vaccination program in Japan. The number of ADEM cases, which were confirmed by MRI abnormality, reported to the
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency were only three including the present cases (20). Thus, we estimate that approximately 0.05 ADEM
cases occurred per 100,000 since initiating HPV vaccination in Japan. This frequency is not particularly higher than that for post-
vaccination ADEM induced by other vaccines. However, we cannot confirm whether this is the true incidence of post-vaccination ADEM at this
time because ADEM is an extremely rare disorder and its diagnosis is obscure. It is therefore important to accumulate further data on
confirmed cases of ADEM temporally associated with HPV vaccination. We herein presented two cases of ADEM following vaccination against HPV.
Clinicians should keep in mind that neurological symptoms due to demyelination can occur after HPV vaccination.
