Correspondence to Dr.　Kei Yamasaki, yamasaki@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp Tracheobronchopathia osteochondroplastica (TO) is a rare benign airway disease
that is characterized by the presence of multiple rock-garden-like nodules on bronchoscopy. TO is a slowly progressive disease of the
trachea and major bronchi, which is typically characterized by such symptoms as a persistent nonproductive cough, dyspnea and wheezing. The
clinical features of TO are variable, and asymptomatic patients may incidentally be diagnosed during the work-up for other diseases. We
herein report a rare case of TO accompanying multiple tracheobronchial polyposis in which bronchoscopic resection of the airway polyp using
a high-frequency snare was successfully performed. Tracheobronchopathia osteochondroplastica (TO) is a rare benign airway disease typically
characterized by the presence of multiple rock-garden-like nodules in the lower trachea and upper main bronchi (1). Because of the absence
of cartilage in this region of the airway, these nodules involve the anterior and lateral walls of the trachea and the bronchus, sparing the
posterior membranous wall (2). Several reported cases have demonstrated successful surgical intervention and bronchoscopic laser therapy for
advanced symptomatic patients (2,3). We herein report the successful bronchoscopic resection of a symptomatic localized polyp due to TO
using a high-frequency snare. An 80-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital for the evaluation and management of multiple
tracheobronchial polyposis and right middle lobe atelectasis. He had a history of polyarteritis nodosa and had been treated with
corticosteroids (prednisolone 6 mg/day). Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed diffuse calcified lesions throughout the cartilaginous
regions of the trachea and bronchi, right middle atelectasis, and airway polyps (4-9 mm) in the left trachea and the left main bronchus
(Fig. 1). The bronchoscopic findings showed diffuse edematous mucosal lesions with polyposis on the left side of the trachea, the right
middle bronchus and the left main bronchus (Fig. 2). A spirometric analysis demonstrated an obstructive impairment, and the forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) was 1.36 L, and FEV1% was 43%. A transbronchial biopsy to make a diagnosis of the airway polyp was
performed, and endoscopic mucosal resection was also carried out using a high-frequency snare to improve ventilatory insufficiency. TO was
pathologically confirmed in the resected submucosal cartilaginous tissue, and mature ossifications were also observed in the tissue (Fig.
3). After resecting the airway polyp, the spirometric data of the FEV1 and FEV1% improved from 1.36 L to 1.69 L and from 43% to 93%,
respectively. Chest computed tomography (CT) of this patient. A: A coronal view of the chest mediastinal window shows diffuse calcified
lesions throughout the cartilaginous regions of the trachea and bilateral bronchi. Noncalcified endobronchial airway polyps are also seen on
the left side of the trachea and the upper side of the left main bronchus (white arrows). B: A transverse view of the chest mediastinal
window demonstrates right middle lobe atelectasis and an endobronchial airway polyp with small calcified lesions (white arrow) in the right
middle lobe bronchus. Endobronchial findings of this patient. There are no remarkable abnormal findings in the trachea (A) and carina (B),
however, bronchoscopy showed a diffuse edematous mucosa with polyposis in the trachea (A), carina (B), right middle bronchus (C) and left
main bronchus (D). Histopathological findings of the airway polyp. A: An endobronchial polyp lesion obtained from the left main bronchus
demonstrated submucosal calcification, ossification and cartilage formation surrounded by chronic airway inflammatory cells. B: An enlarged
view shows the polyp lesion to consist of submucosal ossification and inflammatory cells. The comprehensive etiology of TO remains to be
elucidated, however, chronic airway infections, irritant exposure, several metabolic disorders and genetic factors have been proposed to be
causative factors of TO (3,4). This patient showed typical chest CT findings (Fig. 1) and unusual bronchoscopic features (Fig. 2) of TO in
that a large polyp was observed. Long-term corticosteroid administration might be a potential explanation for the atypical bronchoscopic
findings. Tajima et al. reported that bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) played an important role in nodule formation and might
synergistically act with transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-1) to promote an inductive cascade of TO nodules (5). The airway polyp in our
patient did not include mature ossifications in contrast to the previously reported cases (2,4), and the long-term corticosteroid
administration in this patient might be related to these pathological atypical findings, such as the suppression of calcified lesion
formation. However, there has so far been no report describing the effects of corticosteroids on initiating and enlarging airway polyp
formation; thus, further studies are necessary to clarify the mechanism of airway polyp formation and effective treatment. Ying et al.
reported that chronic airway inflammation might be an important factor in the formation of TO, and they discussed the potential clinical
effects of inhaled corticosteroids to improve the symptoms in patients in the early stage of this disease (3). However, the authors did not
discuss airway polyps. No guidelines have yet been established for the management of TO, and systemic or inhaled corticosteroid treatment
might be one of treatment choices for TO without any problematic clinical symptoms, as seen in the present patient. In conclusion, we herein
reported a rare case of TO accompanied by unusual bronchoscopic features, such as multiple tracheobronchial polyposis, which was
successfully treated using a high-frequency snare. TO is a benign disorder, however, TO may cause various clinical symptoms and spirometric
impairments that necessitate the resection of airway polyps. Physicians should therefore be aware of this disease and its clinical symptoms
and include it in the differential diagnosis.
