Cholesterol polyps are rare in the common bile duct and difficult to diagnose. The small polypoid lesions often go undetected when using
routine imaging methods, such as ultrasonography. We treated a patient with cholesterol polyps in the common bile duct. After failing to
detect choleliths using ultrasonography, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed mild dilation of the common bile duct.
Choledochoscopy was performed during laparoscopic cholecystectomy, which revealed yellowish-white polyps circumferentially distributed
across the luminal surface of the distal common bile duct. Histological examination of biopsy specimens indicated cholesterol polyps with
characteristic foamy cells. The patient was treated with ursodeoxycholic acid, and the number of polyps was found to have been reduced at
the 6-week follow-up based on T-tube choledochoscopic examination. Recovery was unremarkable, and the ursodeoxycholic acid treatment was
discontinued at the 6-month follow-up. Our findings suggest that this rare condition can be treated pharmacologically to avoid potential
postsurgical complications following resection of the distal common bile duct. Cholesterol polyps make up approximately 50% of all polypoid
lesions in the gallbladder, but are rare in the common bile duct (CBD). With an average diameter of 3 to 10窶確m, the small size of
cholesterol polyps confounds diagnosis by ultrasonography and other routine imaging methods. The development of cholesterol polyps is
associated with cholangiocarcinoma. Therefore, choledochoscopic biopsy is essential for the histopathological diagnosis of cholesterol
polyps to rule out malignancy. We encountered a patient with cholesterol polyps in the distal CBD. Choledochoscopic examination was crucial
for the diagnosis of this rare condition. Our report of this case was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of our institution, and
signed, informed consent was obtained from the patient. A 53-year-old woman presented to our hospital with upper right quadrant pain. She
was not jaundice, and had no fever. Her medical history was unremarkable, with no recent diarrhea, pruritus, dark urine, or weight loss
reported. Ultrasonography showed thickening of the gallbladder wall and no obvious dilation or filling defects in the extrahepatic biliary
tract. However, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed mild dilation of the CBD, which suggested a diagnosis of
cholecystitis with cholelithiasis, but choledocholithiasis could not be excluded. Treatment with laparoscopic cholecystectomy and
intraoperative choledochoscopic examination was chosen. The resected gallbladder contained a large amount of sand-like cholelithic material,
with particles approximately 1 to 2窶確m in diameter. The anterior side of the midpoint of the CBD was incised for intraoperative
choledochoscopic examination of the lumen and its contents. Extensive minimal papillary projections were observed in the distal CBD that
were yellowish-white in color, but no choleliths were present. Polyp biopsy was performed, and a T-tube biliary drainage line was installed.
Histological examination of the biopsy specimen revealed foamy cell aggregation in the lamina propria, indicating cholesterol polyps. The
small polyps were distributed across the entire circumference of the luminal surface of the distal CBD, and extended deep into the duodenal
papilla. In our experience, resection of this region of the distal CBD might cause stenosis or sphincter dysfunction. Therefore,
pharmacological treatment was chosen to reduce the size and number of polyps. The patient received 200窶確g ursodesoxycholic acid (UDCA) twice
daily per os. At the 6-week follow-up examination T-tube cholangiography (TTC) showed no obvious filling defect, and choledochoscopic
examination revealed fewer polyps than were observed previously (Fig. 1), at which time the biliary drainage line was removed. Recovery was
unremarkable, and UDCA treatment was discontinued at the 6-month follow-up examination. Imaging and histological data. Preoperative MRCP
images in the (A) transverse plane and (B) coronal plane (reconstructed) showed patent confluence of the pancreatic duct and CBD, with mild
dilation of the latter, but no obvious filling defect. C, Intraoperative choledochoscopy revealed small, yellowish-white polypoid lesions in
the distal CBD. D, Histological examination of biopsy specimens identified clusters of foamy cells within the lamina propria. After 6 weeks
of treatment with 200窶確g UDCA orally 2 times per day, (E) TTC showed no obvious filling defect in the CBD, and (F) choledochoscopy showed
substantially fewer polyps. CBD = common bile duct, MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, TTC = T-tube cholangiography, UDCA =
ursodesoxycholic acid. Cholesterol polyps in the CBD were first reported by Fock in 1958. To date, less than 40 such cases have been
reported in the literature, and our case represents the first report of CBD cholesterol polyps in a patient in China. These small lesions
are often undetectable using ultrasonography, computed tomography, or MRCP, whereas endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography or
percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography can be helpful for diagnosis in certain patients. In our patient, cholesterol polyps in the distal
CBD were not detected by MRCP, which revealed only mild dilation, and choledochoscopy was performed for direct visualization to avoid
misdiagnosis. The exact etiology of cholesterol polyps in the gallbladder and biliary ducts is largely unclear, but it likely involves the
crystallization of cholesterol in the lumen mucosa due to an elevated concentration of cholesterol in the bile. The condition occurs more
frequently in women than in men. In most patients, cholesterol polyps occur in the distal CBD, and are accompanied by cholelithiasis.
However, it has also been reported in patients with congenital choledochal cyst or anomalous bifurcation of the pancreaticobiliary ducts.
Cholesterol polyps are associated with the tumorigenesis of cholangiocarcinoma, in which histological analysis of the polyps has revealed
distinct differences between the benign and malignant conditions. Therefore, direct visual examination and histopathological analysis is
essential to avoid misdiagnosis. Although cholesterol polyps can be resected from the distal CBD during choledochoscopy using biopsy forceps
or spoons, the risk of biliary obstruction due to this condition is, in our experience, very low. In most cases, we believe that radical
resection can result in unnecessary bile duct injury, as well as duodenal papillary dysfunction for cases in which the polyps extended into
the papilla. The dissolution of cholesterol crystals can be achieved by the treatment with UDCA orally. Our findings warrant future studies
of UDCA treatment as an alternative to CBD resection for cholesterol polyps. However, we recommend choledochoscopic examination to confirm
the therapeutic effect of UDCA treatment. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of UDCA therapy for CBD cholesterol polyps.
The authors thank Dr Yi-Ting Meng and Dr Jing-Jing Yao in the Pathology Department at Beijing Tsinghua Changgung Hospital for their
assistance in determining the diagnosis. Abbreviations: BD = common bile duct, MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, TTC =
T-tube cholangiography, UDCA = ursodesoxycholic acid. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
