Lipoid proteinosis (LP, OMIM 247100), also known as Urbach-Wiethe disease or lipoidosis cutis et mucosae, was first described by Urbach and
Wiethe in 1929. It is a rare autosomal recessive genodermatosis characterized by hoarseness from early infancy, distinctive skin and
neurological manifestations, and cutaneous lesions. It affects mucosal membranes of the upper respiratory tract, upper digestive tract,
central nervous system, lymph nodes, and striated muscles. Hamada identified the genetic defect to be a loss-of-function mutation or reduced
expression of the gene encoding extracellular matrix protein 1 (ECM1) on chromosome 1q21 in 2002. So far, approximately, 300 cases have been
reported. This article reported a case with clinical and molecular findings compatible with LP. A 25-year-old male patient was admitted to
Peking Union Medical College Hospital on June 21, 2015. He had mild hoarseness and skin lesions since early childhood. The skin lesions
occurred successively including vesicles, pustules, bullae, and hemorrhagic crusted eruptions on the face and limbs due to minor trauma. The
skin was eventually thickened with waxy, yellow papules or verrucous plaques and nodules. Pock-like or acneiform scars occurred on the face.
Physical examination revealed warty, infiltrated plaques on the extensor aspects of the forearms and elbows. Beaded papules also appeared on
the eyelids and yellow papules in the oral cavity [Figure 1]. The patient had a younger brother who was not affected. No evidence of
consanguinity in his family was found. Clinical presentation of the 25-year-old male patient with lipoid proteinosis. (a) Beaded papule on
the upper eyelid margin is inconspicuous; (b, c and f) mild scar formation in frictional area; (d) yellow-white infiltrates on the oral
mucosa; (e) limited tongue movement. The histology results showed hyaline materials deposited mainly in the papillary dermis and around
blood vessels, sweat duct, hair follicles, and muscle nap, those were positive for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining [Supplementary Figure
1]. To obtain a definitive molecular confirmation of LP in this patient, we analyzed the ECM1 gene. A sequence analysis of the patient
revealed a novel compound heterozygous mutation (p.A44T/p.R392W) in exon 3 and exon 8. The mutation c.130G>A transversion had altered the
Ala/A-44 codon (GCA) to Thr/T-44 codon (ACA), designated p.A44T. The mutation c.1174C>T transversion had altered the Arg/R-392 codon (CGG)
to Trp/W-392 codon (TGG), designated p.R392W [Supplementary Figure 2]. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products were directly Sanger
sequenced. Both identified mutations were not found in 100 normal controls by direct sequencing. PCR can provide a definitive diagnosis for
this patient. Histological presentation in the patient with lipoid proteinosis. Periodic acid-Schiff staining showed accumulation of hyaline
material in the dermis and eosinophilic material in the papillary dermis (PASÃ—200). Click here for additional data file. Sequence analysis
of the patient revealed a compound heterozygous mutation. (a) Mutation p.A44T in exon 3; (b) mutation p.R392W in exon 8. Click here for
additional data file. LP is a rare autosomal recessive genodermatosis that occurs worldwide but more commonly in the northern part of South
Africa. Clinical manifestations ranged from benign dermatological involvement to neurological involvement. Most of the manifestations occur
due to the deposition of PAS-positive hyaline materials in dermis and submucosa. The first clinical manifestation is hoarseness of the cry
or voice after birth, caused by infiltration of the vocal cords. LP is caused by loss-of-function mutations in ECM1 gene. The discovery of
the mutations in ECM1 allows accurate diagnoses to be made using gene sequencing. ECM1 has effects on epidermal differentiation, binding to
dermal collagen and proteoglycan and regulating angiogenesis. It expresses fibrous proteins on the basement membrane and growth factor by
binding to proteoglycan. It also plays an important role on skin homeostasis. The ECM1 gene was mapped to chromosome 1q21.2, which has 10
exons. Almost half of all the mutations are located within exons 6 and 7. Gene sequencing can improve diagnostic accuracy and offer a less
invasive diagnostic test than a skin biopsy. Supplementary information is linked to the online version of the paper on the Chinese Medical
Journal website. This study was supported by a grant of National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81371723). There are no conflicts
of interest. We are grateful to the patient's family for their contribution and participation in this clinical report. We also thank our
colleagues Mr. Wei Wang and Mr. Jing Xie for their help in collecting blood samples. Edited by: Yuan-Yuan Ji
