COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. AUTHORS CONTRIBUTION: CHC and WFW conceived and designed
this study. CHC and WFW analyzed the data, wrote the paper, prepared figures and/or tables. CHC, WFW, SNC, and WLC served this patient. SHW
performed the experiments. All authors reviewed drafts of the paper. Changhua, June 15, 2016 Dear Editor The Cryptococcus gattii complex has
been recognized as an endemic pathogen since the 1990s and has caused multiple outbreaks since then 1 . Cryptococcal meningitis (CM) is a
globally occurring invasive mycosis associated with significant morbidity and mortality 2 , 3 , including papilledema and visual loss 1 , 3
. We present a case of CM caused by C. gattii sensu stricto (AFLP4/VGI) that was complicated by visual loss under the continuation of
antifungal therapy (AFT). A 45-year-old woman complained of neck stiffness and headaches for two weeks. She was admitted to a community
hospital. Her opening intracranial pressure (ICP) was 230 mmH2O. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) study revealed the following values: protein,
53 mg/dL (reference range, 10-45 mg/dL); glucose, 62 mg/dL (45-75 mg/dL); white blood cells (WBCs), 84/mL (<5/mL); lymphocytes, 79%
(63-99%); and neutrophils, 17% (0-2%). The Cryptococcus antigen titer in both CSF and serum were positive, at 1:8 and 1:64, respectively.
With the impression of a diagnosis of CM, the patient received intravenous amphotericin B (AmB; 0.7 mg/kg/day) with flucytosine (5-FC; 100
mg/kg/day) for two weeks, followed by intravenous AmB (1 mg/kg/day) for another two weeks. Then, a consolidation therapeutic regimen with
oral fluconazole (FLC; 450 mg/day orally) was administered for the following three months. She was rehospitalized because of seizures,
unfavorable CSF data, and progression of the brain MRI finding. Her opening ICP was 180 mmH2O. A follow-up CSF study revealed the following
values: protein, 140 mg/dL; glucose, 68 mg/dL; WBCs, 468/mL; lymphocytes, 69/mL; and neutrophils, 16/mL. The cryptococcal antigen titer in
CSF was 1:128, and staining the CSF with India ink reveled positivity for the pathogen. Hence, CM was still present. We prescribed a
combination therapy for reinduction, but she noticed floaters and blurred vision (ou) since the first day of the second admission. Her eye
findings were as follows: visual acuity, no light perception (ou), and fungus with: papilledema, subhyaloid hemorrhage, and retinal
hemorrhage. Her fundus color photograph and follow-up MRI scan are presented in Figure 1. The cryptococcal isolate 44-6 was identified as C.
gattii sensu stricto according to the findings of the culture using canavanine-glycine-bromothymol blue medium. Molecular identification by
sequencing the URA5 gene revealed that the isolate was genotype AFLP4/VGI, representing the recently described species C. gattii sensu
stricto 4 . She received consolidated oral FLC (450 mg/day) at home in the following years. No new neurological sequelae were found after a
follow-up period of 3 years, except for visual loss. Fig. 1Timeline of the C. gattii AFLP4/VGI infection, a serial brain magnetic resonance
image, and serial fundus color photographs. The magnetic resonance image (A, B, October) and 1-month follow-up magnetic resonance image (C,
D, November) were analyzed. The axial, short tau inversion recovery (STIR) image (A, C) and axial, fat-suppressed, post-contrast,
T1-weighted image (B, D) demonstrate a faint but increased signal in both the non-expanded optic nerves (A, arrow). Enhancement (B) in the
follow-up STIR image (C, arrow) shows progression of the high-signal change and mild atrophy of both the optic nerves. The lesser
enhancement (D) is consistent with progression of visual loss. The initial fundus color photograph (E, October) and 1-month follow-up fundus
color photograph (F, November) show retinal hemorrhage. To our knowledge, this is the first case report to describe ocular complications of
CM caused by C. gattii AFLP4/VGI under continuation of AFT in Taiwan. In general, C. gattii AFLP4/VGI tends to produce larger and more
numerous cryptococcomas in the central nervous system 1 . Seaton et al. suggested that the high rate of visual loss in immunocompetent
patients with C. gattii AFLP4/VGI infections may reflect immune-mediated optic nerve dysfunction in C. gattii meningitis caused by either
compression due to arachnoid adhesions or edema and inflammatory cell-mediated damage 5 . The optic nerve lesion can be due to direct
destruction by this pathogen 5 or indirectly caused by increased intracranial pressure 6 . Our case was treated in accordance with the
recommendation in the guidelines 3 , but her eye condition continued to deteriorate, most likely due to optic nerve damage (Fig. 1). Use of
corticosteroids could be recommended for immunocompetent patients with severe C. gattii sensu stricto (AFLP4/VGI) meningitis. CM due to C.
gattii AFLP4/VGI can cause significant neurological morbidities, including ocular complications. We emphasize that physicians should pay
attention to the possible complications of CM in patients, even during active AFT. The authors thank the Changhua Christian Hospital for the
grant support. All authors thank the assistant of the Clinical Microbiology Laboratory of the Changhua Christian Hospital for their
assistance in data collection. Authors thank Miss Yi-Chen Tseng and Miss Chi-Lun Chang, who studied at Department of Microbiology,
Immunology and Biopharmaceuticals, National Chiayi University, Chiayi City, for the re-identification of the isolate. This research project
would not have been possible without the support of many people. The authors wish to express our gratitude to staffs of Division of
Infectious Diseases, Division of Neurosurgery, and Division of Critical Care of Changhua Christian Hospital who were abundantly helpful and
offered patient care, invaluable assistance, and support. ETHICS STATEMENTS: This study was approved by the Changhua Christian Hospital
(CCH) Institutional Review Board [CCH IRB No. 131221] for human subjects RESEARCH FUNDING/SUPPORT: Changhua Christian Hospital (CCH grant
104-CCH-IRP-001, CCH rant 105-CCH-IRP-001)
