*These authors contributed equally to this work. Pallister-Killian syndrome (PKS) is a rare multisystem disorder characterized by
isochromosome 12p and tissue-limited mosaic tetrasomy 12p. In this study, we diagnosed three pediatric patients who were suspicious of
having PKS using array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) and FISH analyses performed on peripheral lymphocytes. Patients 1
and 2 presented with craniofacial dysmorphic features, hypotonia, and a developmental delay. Array CGH revealed two to three copies of 12p
in patient 1 and three copies in patient 2. FISH analysis showed trisomy or tetrasomy 12p. Patient 3, who had clinical features comparable
to those of patients 1 and 2, was diagnosed by using FISH analysis alone. Here, we report three patients with mosaic tetrasomy 12p. There
have been only reported cases diagnosed by chromosome analysis and FISH analysis on skin fibroblast or amniotic fluid. To our knowledge,
patient 1 was the first case diagnosed by using array CGH performed on peripheral lymphocytes in Korea. Pallisterâ€“Killian syndrome (PKS)
(Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man #601803) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by craniofacial dysmorphisms including a prominent
forehead with sparse frontotemporal hair and a wide range of developmental delays, intellectual disability, hypotonia, seizures, skin
pigmentation, and other systemic anomalies . PKS is diagnosed by the presence of tetrasomy 12p, which consists of additional short arms of
chromosome 12. The additional short arms are usually detected as isochromosomes of 12p with tissue-limited mosaicism , which is rarely found
in peripheral blood; therefore, the diagnosis usually requires analysis of cultured fibroblasts . Array-based comparative genomic
hybridization (array CGH) may enable detection of copy number variations using DNA isolated from an uncultured tissue sample. This method
has improved molecular diagnostic detection of clinically significant chromosomal aberrations. In this study, we identified three patients
with mosaic tetrasomy 12p. There have been a few case reports in Korea, in which all patients were detected by chromosome or FISH analysis.
To our knowledge, these are the first reported cases of PKS detected by array CGH in Korea. The first two patients were initially identified
by array CGH, and the other patient was diagnosed with FISH analysis alone. The genetic study was performed with the written informed
consent of the parents. This study was exempted from approval by institutional review board of the hospital. A 4-yr-old boy presented with a
developmental delay with a large hypopigmented macule on his face. Chromosome analysis of peripheral lymphocytes revealed karyotype 46,XY.
Array CGH was performed by using the Affymetrix Cytogenetics 2.7M Array (Affymetrix; Santa Clara, CA, USA) with DNA extracted from
peripheral lymphocytes, which identified two to three copies of chromosome 12p. This finding was suggestive of chimerism between trisomy 12p
and tetrasomy 12p (Fig. 1A). FISH analysis by means of ETV6 (TEL)/RUNX1 (AML1) Extra signal dual color probe (Abbott Molecular Inc., Des
Plaines, IL, USA) was performed on cultured peripheral lymphocytes according to the manufacturer's instructions. This assay revealed that
2.3% and 3.5% of the cells were positive for trisomy 12p and tetrasomy 12p, respectively (Fig. 1B). A 9-month-old female infant presented
with a global developmental delay with a hypopigmented facial macule. Chromosomal analysis showed 46,XX. Three copies of chromosome 12p were
detected with array CGH (Fig. 1A). FISH analysis showed that 11.5% of the cells had tetrasomy 12p (Fig. 1B). A 4-month-old female infant was
referred due to multiple congenital anomalies with a hypopigmented macule. Chromosomal analysis revealed 46,XX. To confirm the suspected
clinical features, FISH analysis was conducted to identify possible additional copies of chromosome 12. Approximately 11% of the cells
showed tetrasomy 12p (Fig. 1B). Tables 1 and 2 summarize the clinical characteristics and results of cytogenetic and FISH analyses and of
array CGH. PKS is a rare chromosomal disorder with characteristic features that change with the patient's age . Craniofacial abnormalities
are prevalent in most patients. Nearly 90% of patients have ophthalmologic abnormalities, and over 75% have a hypopigmented skin lesion and
hearing loss . Our cases had the common dysmorphic facial features such as frontal bossing, a depressed nasal bridge, frontotemporal
balding, and abnormal skin pigmentation. The patients presented here are similar to those reported in other studies. Different tissues are
known to show variable presence or absence of isochromosome 12p, i(12p) . The level of mosaicism varies depending on the gestational age or
tissue-specific mosaicism . The patients described in this report initially had normal chromosomal results on cultured peripheral
lymphocytes. We identified three patients with mosaic tetrasomy 12p. To our knowledge, these are the first reported cases of PKS detected by
array CGH in Korea. The first two patients were initially identified by array CGH, and the other patient was diagnosed with FISH analysis
alone. It is likely that FISH analysis is sufficient for identifying PKS because FISH confirmed the presence of mosaicism in the three
patients presented here. In the prenatal and perinatal periods, however, the clinical characteristics of PKS are not prominent. Therefore,
conventional chromosomal analyses may yield normal results at these ages, necessitating array CGH for definitive diagnosis. Mosaicism in the
supernumerary metacentric isochromosome 12p is often detected in skin fibroblasts although the karyotype of cultured lymphocytes appears
normal. There seems to be a higher success rate of detecting mosaicism in cultured skin fibroblasts than in peripheral blood because
abnormal cells have a lower attrition rate than T lymphocytes do . Furthermore, cell culture may select against abnormal cells.
Phytohemagglutinin is often used in chromosomal analysis to stimulate T lymphocytes to divide. If abnormal cells are less competitive than
are normal cells in stem cell populations, then they may be underrepresented in stimulated cultures . Therefore, cells with isochromosome
12p are likely to be selected against during cell culture . Ballif et al found that the percentage of abnormal cells among
phytohemagglutinin-stimulated cells is lower than that observed in uncultured cells when FISH is used for analysis. This finding suggests
that there is a chromosome-or chromosomal-region-specific growth bias in cell culture. Furthermore, a rapid decline of abnormal clones [with
i(12p)] was discovered during amniocyte subculture , and the death of these abnormal cells has been suggested as the cause of tissue-limited
mosaicism in PKS . Low-level mosaicism of chromosomal abnormalities with clinical significance can be overlooked when masked by a high
proportion of normal cells or by culturing bias that is necessary for conventional cytogenetic testing . Wilkens et al reviewed the existing
literature and stated that peripheral lymphocytes show a higher percentage of cells with a healthy karyotype and a lower percentage of
i(12p) mosaicism. The correct diagnosis has probably been overlooked in a number of patients because skin fibroblasts were not routinely
included in karyotyping in the past . Array CGH is useful for patients who have suspected clinical and/or constitutional abnormalities. This
method can rapidly screen genomes at an unprecedented resolution and has dramatically improved the molecular diagnostic detection of
clinically significant chromosomal aberrations . Array CGH has several advantages over FISH. The former using extracted DNA, does not
require cell culture, which can introduce culturing bias . In addition, cells in all cell cycle phases can be analyzed simultaneously .
However, array CGH of unstimulated peripheral lymphocytes has failed to detect all cases of PKS because it can detect mosaic abnormal cells
at prevalence not lower than 10-20% . Analysis of skin fibroblasts or buccal smears has been proposed as a diagnostic gold standard, but
this notion is still controversial. Hodge et al proposed that a skin biopsy sample should continue to be the diagnostic gold standard for
PKS because of the variable and insufficient quality of buccal smears. Nonetheless, Cobben et al showed that in patients with suspected PKS,
array CGH or FISH analysis of buccal smear cells seems to be the first diagnostic choice because these two methods are reliable, rapid, and
noninvasive. Cobben et al recommended a skin biopsy only if buccal-smear analysis cannot detect i(12p). PKS is a rare multisystem disorder
that is difficult to diagnose prenatally and in early infancy. The diagnosis of PKS can be made by physical examination if characteristic
dysmorphic features and global developmental delay are present. Array CGH can be used to diagnose PKS in early infancy and during the
prenatal period. Clinicians can also employ FISH analysis to diagnose this disorder in patients with visible PKS features. We thank the
patients and their parents for their participation in this study. We are also grateful to the staff of the Department of Cytogenetics at
Samsung Medical Center for their excellent technical assistance. Authors' Disclosures of Potential Conflicts of Interest: No potential
conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Abbreviations: mo, month; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PVL,
periventricular leukomalacia; MR, mitral regurgitation; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus. Abbreviations: array CGH, array-based comparative
genomic hybridization; N/A, Not applicable.
