To present a coincidence of macular telangiectasia type 2 and solitary retinal astrocytic hamartoma in one patient. A 50-year-old woman was
examined in the Department of Ophthalmology of University hospital Kralovske Vinohrady for complaints of metamorphopsia in her left eye. Her
uncorrected visual acuity (VA) was 4/4 on Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study charts (ETDRS), on the retina of her left eye white,
prominent, partially calcified tumour 1 disc diameter in diameter, 1,5 disc diameter from the foveola was detected on the retina. In the
macular region of both eyes, parafoveal greying with crystalline deposits and changes in retinal vasculature were visible. We performed
following examinations: fluorescein angiography (FA), B-scan ultrasound, spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) including
photo documentation. FA showed partial hyperfluorescence of mulberry-like surface of the tumour typical for retinal astrocytic hamartoma.
Parafoveally in both eyes, leakage from parafoveal telangiectasia was apparent. SD-OCT showed cystoid space in the macular region of both
eyes as well as changes in inner and outer photoreceptor segment junction in left eye. SD-OCT of the tumour showed proliferation in retinal
nerve fibre layer with normal structure of underlying retinal layers and choroid. Ultrasound examination of the tumour detected solid,
highly echogenic prominent tumour with high reflectivity and acoustic shadow. A coincidence of two relatively rare clinical units, macular
telangiectasia type 2 and solitary astrocytic hamartoma was detected as a unique and rare observation. Retinal astrocytic hamartoma is a
benign tumour formed through proliferation of well differentiated astrocytes, mulberry-like based on ophthalmoscopy. It is most common in
paediatric patients with tuberous sclerosis or neurofibromatosis . These tumours may be multiple and bilateral in patients with tuberous
sclerosis. Both these diseases are classified as the so called phacomatoses, i.e. autosomal dominant diseases with variable penetration and
expressivity. Organ symptomatology of phacomatoses (derived from the Greek word "phacoma" or congenital condition; established by Van der
Hoeve, Dutch ophthalmologist in 1921) is variegated within the framework of congenital dysplasia of germ layers. In these neuroectodermal
forms, it most commonly involves the skin, nervous system and the eye. It is found rarely as unrelated to these diseases, frequently
representing an accidental finding in the retina of adult patients . Macular telangiectasia type 2 is a progressive bilateral disease of the
macula of unknown etiology, associated with changes in the macular capillary network and retinal atrophy . It may be complicated by the
formation of a neovascular membrane and macular hole. In February 2014, a 50-year-old Caucasian female patient was referred to our
department due to suspected chorioretinitis in the left eye. The patient reported metamorphopsia in the left eye lasting about 6 months.
Both personal and ocular histories were free of any noteworthy facts. VA was 4/4 (ETDRS) natural in both eyes; intraocular pressure was
26 mmHg in the right eye and 23 mmHg in the left eye. The finding in the anterior segment of both the right and left eyes was quite
physiological when examined using the slit lamp. Biomicroscopic examination of the fundus of the left eye revealed a clear, prominent
whitish tumour with calcification at the centre (Fig. 1a) sized 1 disc diameter, up in the temporal region at the edge of the macular area,
1.5 disc diameter from the foveola. No supply vasculature or vascular drainage were visible. Furthermore, parafoveal greying of the retina
was visible in the parafoveolar temporal regions in both eyes, with small crystalline deposits and impaired capillary network structure with
small telangiectasias (Fig. 1a), better visible in red-free photographic documentation (Fig. 1b). Autofluorescence of the fundus in the left
eye showed a mild decrease in autofluorescence in the area of the tumour with hyperautofluorescence at the calcification site (Fig. 2). The
macular regions of both eyes showed a mild increase in autofluorescence. Fluorescein angiography showed mild fluorescein leakage at the
tumour site in the left eye in late phases, with accentuation of the mulberry-like structure of the tumour. In the macular regions of both
eyes, the telangiectasias were coloured in early phases with fluorescein leakage in the foveola in late phases (Fig. 3). SD-OCT of the
tumour showed proliferation in the retinal nerve fibre layer with a normal structure of deeper retinal and choroid layers (Fig. 4) with
centrally located calcification associated with an acoustic shadow. In the area of the foveola with normal contours, small cystoid areas
were visible in both eyes, as well as small areas of impaired retinal architecture at the junction of external and internal photoreceptor
segments (Fig. 5). Ultrasound assessment of the left eye showed a solid, highly echogenic lesion in the temporal region above the central
area, prominent by 0.65 mm, with high reflectivity 85-90 % with central calcification and an indicated acoustic shadow (Fig. 6). The finding
was concluded as macular telangiectasia type 2 associated with a solitary retinal astrocytic hamartoma. No skin alterations were shown in
the patient, in the sense of neuroectodermal phacomatoses, and her general condition was not associated with neurological symptomatology
either. The additionally collected history confirmed no family burden with the above mentioned diseases. The 85-year-old mother of the
patient has been followed at our department due to bilateral active neovascular membrane; however, the advanced stage of the finding at the
time of diagnosis prevented us from determining whether it had developed in connection with macular telangiectasia of the mother. To confirm
our diagnosis and to rule out familial form of macular telangiectasia type 2 we also examined the 47-year-old brother and, with consent of
his parents, 7-year-old son of the patient but found no signs of macular telangiectasia or astrocytic hamartoma.Fig. 1Colour fundus
photography (a). Whitish tumour with calcification at the centre in the upper temporal region of the left eye. Retinal greying with small
crystalline deposits and impaired structure of the capillary network with small telangiectasias in temporal parafoveolar region of both
eyes. All changes are better visible in red-free documentation of the fundus (b) Fig. 2Hypoautofluorescence at the lesion site with
hyperautofluorescence of the central calcification in the left eye. Mild increase in autofluorescence in macular regions of both eyes Fig.
3Late phase FA – leakage from parafoveolar telangiectasias in the macula, leakage in the tumour area in the left eye, with accentuation of
the mulberry-like structure of the tumour Fig. 4OCT at the tumour site in the left eye – proliferation in the retinal nerve fibre layer with
normal structure of deeper layers of the retina and normal choroidea; a shadow at the calcification site Fig. 5OCT of the macula of the
right (a) and left (b) eye – slight cystic infiltration in both eyes and areas of impairment of retinal architecture at the junction of
external and internal photoreceptor segments in the left eye Fig. 6Ultrasound of the left eye – solid, highly echogenic, prominent lesion
with high reflectivity and an indicated acoustic shadow Colour fundus photography (a). Whitish tumour with calcification at the centre in
the upper temporal region of the left eye. Retinal greying with small crystalline deposits and impaired structure of the capillary network
with small telangiectasias in temporal parafoveolar region of both eyes. All changes are better visible in red-free documentation of the
fundus (b) Hypoautofluorescence at the lesion site with hyperautofluorescence of the central calcification in the left eye. Mild increase in
autofluorescence in macular regions of both eyes Late phase FA – leakage from parafoveolar telangiectasias in the macula, leakage in the
tumour area in the left eye, with accentuation of the mulberry-like structure of the tumour OCT at the tumour site in the left eye –
proliferation in the retinal nerve fibre layer with normal structure of deeper layers of the retina and normal choroidea; a shadow at the
calcification site OCT of the macula of the right (a) and left (b) eye – slight cystic infiltration in both eyes and areas of impairment of
retinal architecture at the junction of external and internal photoreceptor segments in the left eye Ultrasound of the left eye – solid,
highly echogenic, prominent lesion with high reflectivity and an indicated acoustic shadow Considering that currently no efficient therapy
of macular telangiectasia type 2 is known, and given the stability of the astrocytic hamartoma without any signs of growth after 18 months
of follow-up, the patient is only actively followed without any therapy for now. In most cases, astrocytic hamartomas are benign lesions
showing no tendency to grow and cause complications and without any need for a therapeutic intervention. The ophthalmological presentation
is very variable ranging from flat to elevated lesions of whitish or yellow colour. They tend to be slightly opaque or transparent, with not
very well defined boundaries. Calcifications are common in the lesion. Spontaneous regression of the tumour has also been observed [3, 4].
However, cases of progressive growth can also be found in the literature, associated with exudative retinal detachment, intravitreal
bleeding and dissemination, and with the development of neovascular glaucoma . These cases can be treated with laser coagulation,
cryotherapy or photodynamic therapy at the tumour site [9, 10]. A surgery is necessary in cases of retinal detachment. Severe neovascular
glaucoma may be an indication for bulbar enucleation . It is unclear whether solitary astrocytic hamartomas not associated with general
symptoms of phacomatoses represent a separate clinical unit or whether they are a partial expression of tuberous sclerosis or a forme fruste
. Neurofibromatosis (or von Recklinghausen disease) is associated with typical discoloured café au lait skin patches and with plexiform
neurofibromas in the area of eyelids and central nervous system (CNS) meningiomas . Tuberous sclerosis (or Bourneville-Pringle disease) is
associated with the ocular finding of adenoma sebaceum – butterfly-like vascularized red papulae on the skin of the nose and face or,
possibly, in rare cases discoloured café au lait skin patches; astrocytic hamartoma may also develop in the CNS and cause epilepsy.
Fluorescein angiography clearly shows a network of small capillaries of the tumour in the arterial and venous phase, later accompanied by
its homogeneous hyperfluorescence [1, 14], gaining a mulberry-like appearance of the surface . Tumour autofluorescence depends on the range
of calcification. The calcified part of the tumour shows strong autofluorescence; noncalcified parts block retinal autofluorescence .
Optical coherence tomography shows a hyperreflexive formation growing from the layer of retinal nerve fibres with a preserved structure of
external layers of the retina and smooth transition to the surrounding normal retina. A shadow may be apparent, caused by calcifications in
the tumour. The finding may also be associated with vitreous traction on the tumour surface and an edema in the area of the tumour or in the
macula . Ultrasound examination shows astrocytic hamartoma as an elevation at the lesion site with high reflectivity, often with
calcifications. A fine-needle biopsy can be performed in the case of unclear findings . As regards differential diagnosis, several
additional modalities should be considered. In particular, other glial tumours of the retina are concerned – presumed solitary circumscribed
retinal astrocytic proliferation (PSCRAP) and acquired retinal astrocytoma . PSCRAP is found in elderly patients without a history of
tuberous sclerosis or neurofibromatosis. Compared to astrocytic hamartoma, such lesions are usually well circumscribed, unilateral flat
formations, shadowing deeper retinal structures. They do not include calcifications. SD-OCT scans clearly show their origin in the nerve
fibres layer with the shadowing of deeper retinal layers. No edema is usually present at the lesion site or in the macula. They are stable
lesions without any tendency to grow and cause complications . Acquired retinal astrocytoma is found in adult patients without a history of
tuberous sclerosis or neurofibromatosis . It is a solitary yellowish tumour. Calcifications are not usually present. Unlike astrocytic
hamartoma, the astrocytoma tends to grow slowly, which is usually associated with intraretinal exudation and secondary retinal detachment .
Our patient did not meet the criteria for any of these diagnoses. Macular telangiectasia type 2 is a progressive bilateral disease of the
macula of unknown etiology, with characteristic alterations of the macular capillary network and with the formation of parafoveolar
telangiectasias; in later stages it shows dilated capillaries and retinal atrophy [2, 19]. Other characteristics include reduced
transparency of the retina (greying), crystalline deposits, foveal atrophy and retinal pigment epithelium hyperplasia. Müller cell counts of
the retina also decrease, as well as the density of macular pigments lutein and zeaxanthin . All these alterations are usually most
prominent in the temporal region from the foveola, up to about 1 disc diameter, but they may also involve a circular area around the
foveola. The alterations do not respect the horizontal raphe of the retina. The disease may be complicated by the development of neovascular
membrane [2, 19] and macular hole [2, 22]. Prevalence of the disease in the white population has been reported between 0.004 % and 0.1 % ,
with the same incidence in both sexes . Family incidence of the disease has been known [2, 26, 27]. Autosomal dominant inheritance is
presumed with reduced penetration and variable expressivity. No specific gene responsible for the disease has been identified . Several
classifications of the disease have been proposed. Gass and Blodi proposed to divide the disease into 5 stages based on chronological
development of alterations in the fundus . Yannuzi et al. suggested dividing the disease to a nonproliferative and proliferative stage .
Many therapeutical approaches have been tried – laser photocoagulation of the retina [2, 28], intravitreal triamcinolone [29, 30],
photodynamic therapy [31, 32], and antiVEGF intravitreal injections [33, 34], [32, 35]. Efficacy of antiVEGF products and photodynamic
therapy has been shown in findings complicated by neovascular membrane . No efficient therapy has been known yet for the nonproliferative
stage of the disease [32, 41]. Concurrence of astrocytic hamartoma and telangiectasias has been described . However, this was related to a
unilateral finding in a patient with tuberous sclerosis. The astrocytic hamartoma was flat, diffuse, not quite clearly expressed.
Neovascularizations localized in the superior region from the papilla and along the inferotemporal arcade were already present at the time
of the diagnosis. Telangiectasias in the macular area, in the inferior and nasal regions from the foveola, were discovered in year 2 of the
patient follow-up; hard exudates were present in the area of the telangiectasias, and FA clearly showed leakage from the telangiectasias.
The finding in the patient thus does not correspond to a finding typical for macular telangiectasia type 2. Concurrent incidence of solitary
astrocytic hamartoma of the retina and of macular telangiectasia type 2 was present in our patient. We could not find any evidence of any
relationship between these two diseases in available literature (PubMed). In this case, it is only an accidental concurrence of two diseases
given that unilateral retinal astrocytic hamartoma is combined with a bilateral finding of macular telangiectasia type 2. Central nervous
system Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study charts Fluorescein angiography Presumed solitary circumscribed retinal astrocytic
proliferation Spectral domain optical coherence tomography Visual acuity None. No funding was obtained for this study. All data supporting
our findings will be shared upon request, although the majority is contained within the manuscript. MP was responsible for obtaining
consent, acquiring the data and drafting the manuscript. JK and MV helped establish the final clinical diagnosis and both of them critically
revised the manuscript and assisted in drafting its final version. MVok performed the ultrasound examination and critically revised the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Full verbal and written consent has been obtained from all patients for submission of this manuscript for publication. Ethics committee of
University Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady waived the need for formal approval in this case. Full verbal and written consent has been obtained
from all patients and the parents of the child participating in this study.
