Correspondence to Dr.　Hiroyuki Seto, seto-kob@umin.ac.jp We herein report the case of a 63-year-old man who presented with a 3-month history
of a cutaneous nodular lesion of his jaw, low grade fever, lethargy and progressive cognitive impairment. He had a 30-year history of
multiple sclerosis and had been treated with fingolimod for the previous 2 years. Laboratory data revealed CD4 lymphocytopenia and a tissue
culture of the skin nodule was positive for Cryptococcus neoformans. Cerebrospinal fluid and serum cryptococcal antigen tests were also
positive and we diagnosed him to have disseminated cryptococcosis. This dissemination might be associated with fingolimod-induced CD4
lymphocytopenia. The risk of an opportunistic infection should therefore be considered when encountering fingolimod-treated patients.
Cryptococcosis is an opportunistic fungal infection caused by Cryptococcus species, and Cryptococcus neoformans is considered to be a major
primary pathogen. Although exposure to Cryptococcus species is common, the development of symptomatic disease usually requires
immunosuppression. With an increasing number of immunosuppressed patients because of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, solid
organ transplantation, and the clinical use of potent immunosuppressive agents, such as cancer chemotherapy, monoclonal antibodies, and
corticosteroids, cryptococcosis has now become a common infectious complication (1). Fingolimod is an oral Food and Drug Administration-
approved medication for adults with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS). Fingolimod is a sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) receptor
modulator which prevents the egress of lymphocytes from the lymph nodes (2). Because of its mechanism of action, the risk of opportunistic
infectious complication, such as varicella zoster virus infection, has been reported (3,4). Recently, three case reports of Cryptococcus
infection associated with fingolimod have been documented (5-7). A 63-year-old man with a history of MS was referred to our hospital for a
detailed investigation of an erythematous nodular lesion with ulceration present on his left mandible. Three months prior to referral, he
developed a papular lesion on his left lower jaw, low-grade fever, lethargy, and muscle weakness. The cutaneous lesion had gradually
increased in size and eventually developed into an ulcer. One month prior to this referral, lower-extremity muscle weakness and cognitive
impairment worsened and he could not read or write correctly. He was referred to our dermatology department for an investigation of the
cutaneous lesion. The case had a 30-year history of MS with poor responses to disease-modifying therapy, and two years prior to referral,
treatment with fingolimod had been started. Nifedipine, valsartan, clopidogrel, aspirin, and atorvastatin had also been administered for
hypertension and coronary heart disease in his past medical history. Since the start of fingolimod treatment, his lymphocyte counts were
approximately 500 /μL. He denied any recent travel or close contact with birds. On examination, he was not in acute distress, but his speech
was slow and his accent was flat. He had no fever. He had a normal blood pressure (122/64 mmHg) and heart rate (60 bpm). His respiratory
rate and oxygen saturation were 16 per minute and 99% in room air, respectively. There was an erythematous multilocular lesion with
ulceration that measured 5×3 cm on his left mandible (Fig. 1). There was slight neck stiffness. Cardiovascular, pulmonary, and abdominal
examinations were normal. A neurological examination revealed left lateral gaze palsy, left central facial paralysis, slight dysarthria, and
limb-kinetic apraxia. His muscle strength and tendon reflex of the upper extremities were normal and his bilateral lower-extremity muscle
strength was 2/5 (an inability to overcome gravity). Positive findings for Babinski's reflex and foot clonus were seen bilaterally. These
neurological findings, except for lower-extremity muscle weakness, were the same as they had been before referral. A cutaneous lesion of the
left mandible. A: Three months prior to admission. There was an erythematous nodule beneath the lower lip. B: On admission, there was an
erythematous multilocular lesion with ulcer that measured 5×3 cm in size on his left mandible. To investigate the cause of the skin lesion,
a skin biopsy was performed. The histopathology of the skin biopsy revealed no malignant cells. However, many yeast-like organisms with
thick capsules were observed in the skin specimens and periodic acid-Schiff and Grocott staining were positive for these organisms (Fig. 2).
C. neoformans was isolated and identified from a tissue culture. Both a tissue culture and polymerase chain reaction for Mycobacterium
tuberculosis were negative. Light microscopy findings of a skin biopsy specimen from the left mandible. A: The biopsy specimen revealed
diffuse inflammatory infiltration [magnification×100, Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining]. B: Many yeast cells with a thick capsule
(magnification×200, H&E staining). C: Numerous periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) -positive encapsulated yeast cells (magnification×200, PAS). D:
Grocott staining of the biopsy specimen showed numerous yeast cells that were black in color (magnification×200, Grocott). Computed
tomography (CT) of the chest revealed multinodular lesions in the left lung. Both staining and a culture of his sputum showed no pathogen
growth. Bronchoscopy for lung nodular lesions was not performed. Fluid attenuated inversion recovery images of brain magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) showed multiple hyperintense oval lesions in the white matter. The same oval lesions observed by brain MRI performed one year
prior to this episode were present. Therefore, these lesions were most likely due to MS. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination yielded
elevated white blood cell numbers (74 /μL) and protein (323 mg/dL), and the titer of cryptococcal antigen by latex agglutination of CSF was
1:1,024. The opening pressure of a lumbar puncture was 16 cm H2O. Mononuclear and polynuclear white cells in the CSF were present at 90% and
10% of overall white blood cells, respectively. However, gram staining, India ink staining and a culture of CSF showed no bacterial or
fungal pathogens. Repeated blood cultures were all negative for bacterial and fungal pathogens. Laboratory investigations, including liver
enzyme levels, renal function and electrolytes, were all within the normal limits, but the titer of serum cryptococcal antigen was 1:256.
White blood cell counts were 5,000 /μL (neutrophils 82%, lymphocytes 6%, monocytes 8%). Absolute lymphocyte counts were 300 /μL (CD4+
lymphocytes 145 /μL, CD8+ lymphocytes 113 /μL). Antigen and antibody tests for HIV were negative. We reached a diagnosis of disseminated
cryptococcal infection based on a tissue culture of the skin biopsy, and positive findings for CSF and the serum cryptococcal antigen test.
After admission, the administration of fingolimod was stopped because of lymphocytopenia, which might have led to an immunocompromised
state. Liposomal amphotericin B 300 mg/day (5 mg/kg/day) and flucytosine 4,000 mg/day (64 mg/kg/day) were administered for 6 weeks as
induction therapy. Thereafter, consolidation therapy for 8 weeks with fluconazole 400 mg orally daily was administered. Two weeks after the
initiation of induction therapy, we repeated a CSF examination and observed a decrease in the number of white blood cells (49 /μL) and
protein (177 mg/dL). After 4 weeks of induction therapy, the absolute lymphocyte counts returned to normal levels (1,239 /μL) and a follow-
up study with chest CT showed diminished nodular lesions in the left lung. After 6 weeks of induction therapy, his cutaneous lesion had
almost completely healed. However, the lower-extremity muscle weakness and cognitive impairment had only slightly improved, though no
obvious exacerbation of MS was seen. He was transferred to a regional hospital for continuous care and rehabilitation. Fingolimod is a S1P
receptor modulator with an immunomodulatory and disease-modifying activity in MS patients (2). A previous study reported that fingolimod
reduced the frequency of clinical exacerbations and delayed the accumulation of physical disability in adults with relapsing forms of MS
(8). The S1P receptor regulates lymphocyte egress from both the thymus and peripheral lymphoid organs and is essential for lymphocyte
recirculation. Therefore, the mechanism of action of fingolimod-phosphate is to inhibit the S1P receptor function, thus preventing
lymphocyte egress from the lymph nodes, reducing the number of lymphocytes in the peripheral blood and ultimately preventing them from
entering the central nervous system (CNS) (9,10). Fingolimod induced a dose-dependent reduction in the peripheral lymphocyte counts to
20-30% of the baseline value (2), but it also increases the risk of infections, such as varicella zoster virus (3,4). Although fingolimod
has been reported to reduce the number of both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, the effect was more pronounced for the CD4+ T-cell subset (11). C.
neoformans is a basidiomycetous encapsulated yeast that is ubiquitous in the environment. Cryptococcosis is an invasive fungal infection
caused by C. neoformans or C. gattii. Most patients with symptomatic disseminated cryptococcosis have an underlying immunocompromised
condition, such as HIV infection, prolonged treatment with corticosteroids, organ transplantation, advanced malignancy, diabetes, or
sarcoidosis (1,12). The development of cryptococcosis is also associated with idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia (13) or the use of specific
immune-modifying agents, such as alemtuzumab, infliximab, etanercept, or adalimumab (14,15). To the best of our knowledge, only three case
reports of cryptococcal infection associated with fingolimod treatment have been reported to date (5-7). Including the present case, the CD4
cell counts were obtained for 3 of the 4 cases, and these 3 cases all demonstrated CD4 lymphocytopenia. Although a causal link between
fingolimod-induced CD4 lymphocytopenia and cryptococcosis was not proven directly, the decreased CD4 cell counts associated with fingolimod
might be a risk factor for acute cryptococcal infection or a reactivation of a latent infection. The administration of fingolimod should be
immediately stopped in patients who develop a serious infection and it should not be initiated again until the infection has completely
resolved. Further investigations are needed to clarify the relationship between fingolimod treatment and cryptococcal infection, and
elucidate whether fingolimod can be reintroduced safely in patients with cryptococcosis. C. neoformans has been reported to infect any
organ, while the two most common sites for infection are the lung and CNS, followed by skin. A common skin lesion is the papule or
maculopapule with a soft or ulcerated center. Some lesions in severely immunosuppressed patients resemble molluscum contagiosum, and they
can mimic squamous carcinoma or basal cell carcinoma (16). Because of the variety of associated skin manifestations, a correct diagnosis
requires a biopsy with proper histopathology and culture analyses. In most cases, these skin lesions represent disseminated infection. For
the diagnosis of a cryptococcal infection, suspicious skin lesions should be biopsied, and if a cryptococcal skin infection is diagnosed,
then proactive screening of disseminated lesions, especially in the CNS is necessary. The mortality associated with cryptococcosis in HIV-
negative patients is approximately 30% (17-19). Unrecognized and untreated cryptococcosis can thus be fatal, especially in immunocompromised
patients, and untreated cryptococcal meningoencephalitis is uniformly fatal. Although our patient survived and the cutaneous lesion healed
successfully, the impaired activity of daily life and reduced cognitive function persisted. Early recognition and appropriate treatment is
therefore important to reduce morbidity and prevent progression to a potentially life-threatening CNS disease. Cryptococcal infection should
be considered in MS patients treated with fingolimod who have subacute symptoms, such as skin lesions, low grade fever, lethargy or
cognitive impairment, especially if lymphocytopenia or decreased CD4 cell counts are observed. As in the case of HIV infection or idiopathic
CD4 lymphocytopenia, regular monitoring of CD4 cell counts is thus considered to be warranted in patients treated with fingolimod.
Neurologists and general practitioners should therefore be aware of the potential risk of cryptococcal infections, and possibly other
opportunistic infections in patients treated with fingolimod. The authors would like to sincerely thank Dr. Yasuko Hirano, Dr. Takehiro
Toyokuni and Dr. Takashi Arai for their valuable contributions to the patient care. The authors are also deeply grateful to Dr. Shungo
Yamamoto for insightful comments and suggestions on draft of this manuscript.
