Myoclonus is a clinical sign characterized by sudden, brief jerky, shock-like involuntary movements of a muscle or group of muscles.
Dystonia is defined as a syndrome of sustained muscle contractions, frequently causing twisting and repetitive movements or abnormal
postures. Cases of myoclonus or dystonia secondary to a structural lesion in the cerebellum have been reported. However, there has never
been a reported case of combined myoclonus and dystonia secondary to a cerebellar lesion. Herein, we report a 22-year-old female patient
with sudden-onset myoclonic jerks, dystonic posture and mild ataxia in the right upper extremity. At age 19, she experienced sudden headache
with vomiting. The neurological examination showed ataxia, myoclonus and dystonia in the right upper extremity. Brain images demonstrated a
hemorrhage in the right cerebellar hemisphere secondary to a cavernous malformation. After resection of the hemorrhagic mass, headache with
vomiting disappeared and ataxia improved, but myoclonus and dystonia persisted. It is the first report of combined focal myoclonus and
dystonia secondary to a cerebellar lesion. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12883-016-0745-6) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users. Myoclonus is a clinical sign characterized by sudden, brief jerky and shock-like
involuntary movements of a muscle or group of muscles. The main anatomical origins of the myoclonic jerks are known to be cortical,
subcortical, spinal, and peripheral. Although rare, several cases of myoclonus secondary to a structural lesion in the cerebellum have been
reported. Therefore, it has been speculated that cerebellum might be one of the possible generators of myoclonus . Progressive myoclonus was
reported in a young child with a ganglioglioma in the region of the deep cerebellar white matter and nuclei . Dystonia is defined as a
syndrome of sustained muscle contractions, frequently resulting in twisting and repetitive movements or abnormal postures. Although most
common structural lesions responsible for dystonia are in basal ganglia, cerebellum is also considered to be important in dystonia [3, 4].
Dystonia secondary to a cerebellar lesion is rare, but several cases have been reported in the literature. For example, focal limb dystonia
was demonstrated in a patient with a cerebellar mass . Herein, we describe an unusual case of sudden-onset combined focal myoclonus and
dystonia secondary to a cerebellar lesion. A 22-year-old right-handed woman was referred for management of jerky movements and abnormal
posturing of the right hand that had developed since acute hemorrhage in the right cerebellar hemisphere secondary to a cavernous
malformation. At age 19, she developed an episode of severe headache with vomiting, and poor coordination. Examination revealed ataxia in
her right upper extremity along with jerks and abnormal posturing of her right hand and fingers. Brain computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) showed a hemorrhage in the right cerebellar hemisphere compressing the fourth ventricle (Fig. 1a and b). No
structure lesions were found in the supratentorial region. Resection of the mass and pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of
cavernous malformation. Her headache improved after surgery. However, mild ataxia in the right arm, abnormal posturing of the hand and
spontaneous and sudden jerks of the right fingers persisted. Furthermore, the jerks were unable to be suppressed voluntarily but disappeared
during sleep. Alcohol intake did not seem to affect those abnormal movements, but anxiety and stress worsened the symptoms.Fig. 1Brain
images. Axial CT scan at the onset of the symptoms demonstrated a hemorrhagic mass in the right cerebellar hemisphere and the fourth
ventricle compressed by the mass (a). Axial T2-weighted MRI demonstrated heterogeneous low signal intensity of the mass (44 × 37 mm) with
high signal intensity in the periphery (b). Axial T1-weighted MRI at 15-month follow-up after resection demonstrated a post-operative
malacic lesion in the right cerebellar hemisphere (c) Brain images. Axial CT scan at the onset of the symptoms demonstrated a hemorrhagic
mass in the right cerebellar hemisphere and the fourth ventricle compressed by the mass (a). Axial T2-weighted MRI demonstrated
heterogeneous low signal intensity of the mass (44 × 37 mm) with high signal intensity in the periphery (b). Axial T1-weighted MRI at
15-month follow-up after resection demonstrated a post-operative malacic lesion in the right cerebellar hemisphere (c) Neurological
examination at our clinic showed mild dysmetria in the right upper extremity on the finger-to-nose test. The right hand showed occasional
brisk jerks at rest which became more evident on maintaining posture, but were not provoked by touch. Abnormal posturing of the fingers was
noted, which was accentuated while outstretching. An abnormally tight grip was observed while writing with a pencil. (See Additional file 1,
a video footage of the patient showing these features in more detail). The patient presented symmetrical deep tendon reflex and intact
proprioceptive sensation. No long-tract signs were found. There were no changes in the severity of these involuntary movements during a
6-month trial of piracetam, biperiden, baclofen and clonazepam. Additional file 1: A 22-year-old woman with focal myoclonus and dystonia in
the right upper extremity. No myoclonus is noted at rest or triggered by external stimuli. Postural myoclonus of the right hand is prominent
and her right fingers show dystonic posturing when she outstretches the arms and rotates the wrist. The abnormal posturing of hand also
interferes with a writing task. The patient shows normal gait. Additional file 1: A 22-year-old woman with focal myoclonus and dystonia in
the right upper extremity. No myoclonus is noted at rest or triggered by external stimuli. Postural myoclonus of the right hand is prominent
and her right fingers show dystonic posturing when she outstretches the arms and rotates the wrist. The abnormal posturing of hand also
interferes with a writing task. The patient shows normal gait. A 15-month follow-up MRI demonstrated a post-operative malacic lesion in the
right cerebellar hemisphere (Fig. 1c). Surface electromyography (EMG) recordings of the right forearm while keeping outstretched illustrated
the typical features of myoclonus with synchronous bursts (93–97 ms) of EMG activities in agonist and antagonist muscles (Fig. 2).Fig.
2Surface EMG. EMG recordings of the right upper extremity while maintaining a posture demonstrate two consecutive jerks (93–97 ms), showing
synchronous bursts in agonist and antagonist muscles. PRO: pronator teres muscle; SUPI: supinator muscle; DI. EXT: extensor digitorum
communis muscle; DI. FLE: flexor digitorum profundus muscle; CA. EXT: extensor carpi ulnaris muscle; CA. FLE: flexor carpi radialis muscle
Surface EMG. EMG recordings of the right upper extremity while maintaining a posture demonstrate two consecutive jerks (93–97 ms), showing
synchronous bursts in agonist and antagonist muscles. PRO: pronator teres muscle; SUPI: supinator muscle; DI. EXT: extensor digitorum
communis muscle; DI. FLE: flexor digitorum profundus muscle; CA. EXT: extensor carpi ulnaris muscle; CA. FLE: flexor carpi radialis muscle
Our patient presented with sudden-onset shock-like jerks in her right fingers, superimposed on more sustained abnormality of posture in the
right hand with mild ataxia in the right arm. Surface EMG recordings confirmed the jerks as myoclonus, which were synchronous and short-
lasting activities in agonist and antagonist muscles. Dystonic posturing of the right hand was evident in clinical examination (Additional
file 1). It is most likely that the cerebellar lesion is responsible for both myoclonus and dystonia in our case based on the following
reasons: 1) The onset of the myoclonus and dystonia coincided with onset of ataxia; 2) The lesion of the right cerebellar hemisphere was
demonstrated on the brain CT and MRI; and 3) Involuntary movements were ipsilateral to the cerebellar lesion. Cerebellum as a structure in
cerebro-cerebellar loops, participates in motor control by means of sensorimotor integration - the process whereby sensory input is
integrated by the central nervous system and used for assisting motor program execution [6, 7]. Even though there have been reports of
dystonia in cerebellar lesion, the pathophysiology is not entirely clear. However, there are suggestions that abnormal cerebellar learning
and functional interactions between cerebellar and basal ganglia circuits may play a role [8, 9]. Role of cerebellum in myoclonus is also
not clear. However, there are several reported cases of cortical myoclonus in patients with cerebellar pathology, which are documented by
neurophysiology and pathology . This paradoxical absence of cortical pathology and cortical myoclonus in patients with cerebellar pathology
has promoted the authors to suggest that enhanced excitability of the sensorimotor cortex may arise as a distant effect of cerebellar
pathology . This has further been explored in the review by Ganos et al. . Our case is unique in that the hemorrhage in the right cerebellar
hemisphere and subsequent surgical operation result in myoclonus and dystonia at the same time, and it further supports the role of
cerebellum in the generation of myoclonus and dystonia. In conclusion, the findings in our patient support that movement disorders resulting
from lesions of the cerebellum may include myoclonus and dystonia. Computed tomography Electromyography Magnetic resonance imaging We thank
the patient and her family for their consents to publish the case report and the accompanying video segment. We receive no funding support.
All data and material (Additional file 1: video) supporting our findings are contained within the manuscript. GS examined the patient and
drafted the manuscript. GN evaluated the neuroimaging findings and provided critical clinical opinions. CWS and HP helped with collection
and analysis of EMG and clinical data. KYL helped with English-editing of the manuscript. BJ conceived the case and is accountable for the
integrity of the entire work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The author (s) declared no conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, funding, and/or publication of this article. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and
patient’s mother for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The patient has given her consent for this case report.
