Atheroma of the facial artery is an extremely rare disease. Herein, we report an extremely rare case of an atheroma arising from the facial
artery, mimicking a parotid gland tumor. The preoperative diagnosis was a right-sided parotid gland tumor. We performed removal of the right
parotid gland tumor, via a modified face-lift incision. Histological examination of the specimen revealed an atheroma of the facial artery.
Clinicians should consider atheroma in the differential diagnosis of tumors arising around the parotid gland. Atheroma with calcification
usually occurs from an atherosclerotic plaque. In the head and neck region, an atheroma can occur either in the common carotid artery at the
bifurcation of the internal carotid artery and the external carotid artery or in their branches. There have been few reports of an atheroma
associated with calcification mimicking tumors; however, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of an atheroma mimicking a
parotid gland tumor. Herein, we report an extremely rare case of an atheroma arising from the facial artery, mimicking a parotid gland
tumor. A 43-year-old female presented with a complaint of a right infra-auricular mass of 3 years’ duration. The patient's medical and
familial history was unremarkable. She was not getting alcohol and tobacco. All admission laboratory tests were within normal limits. She
denied any fever, chills, pain, or tenderness. Upon physical examination, a firm, 2.0 cm sized mass was palpated in the right parotid space.
Neck computed tomography (CT) scans demonstrated a 2.1 cm sized well-defined, poorly enhancing mass with calcification in the right parotid
space, without invasion of the adjacent structures (Fig. 1). Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration cytology of the right parotid mass was
performed several times; however, an adequate cell harvest was not obtained because of the hardness of the mass. Neck CT scans show a 2.1 cm
sized well-defined, poorly enhancing mass (arrow) with calcification in the right parotid space, without invasion of the adjacent
structures. On the basis of these observations, the preoperative diagnosis was a right-sided parotid gland tumor in the parotid tail or
accessory parotid gland. We performed removal of the right parotid gland tumor, via a modified face-lift incision under general anesthesia.
After making an incision, intraoperative exploration revealed a hard, black colored tumor underneath the facial nerve branch in front of the
parotid gland (Fig. 2). Operation revealed that the mass originated from the facial artery. After ligation of the facial artery, the mass
was completely excised without causing facial nerve damage. Histological examination of the specimen revealed an atheroma with calcification
(Fig. 3). The postoperative course was uneventful. At the last follow-up, there has been no recurrence, and the patient remains
asymptomatic. This study was approved by the institutional review board of the Chonnam National University Hwansun Hospital. Informed
consent was given by the patient. Intraoperative exploration revealed a hard, black colored tumor (arrow) underneath the facial nerve branch
(arrowhead) in front of the parotid gland (P). Histological examination of the specimen showed that the vascular lumen is obliterated by an
atherosclerotic plaque. The atheroma showed a necrotic area with scattered inflammatory cells and fibrous thickening with calcification.
(hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×10). Cardiovascular disease caused 14 million deaths per year in the world. At least 20% of ischemic strokes
are thromboembolism from an atherosclerotic plaque at the carotid bifurcation or internal carotid artery. Some authors suggested that
atheroma is a neoplasm, consisting of smooth muscle cells derived from the tunica media of an artery. Similar signaling proteins and
proteinases may be involved in dysregulation of angiogenesis and disruption of normal basement membranes in the progression of both atheroma
and cancers. Carotid artery atheroma occurs secondary to mature atherosclerotic plaque formation and is associated with an increased risk of
cerebrovascular accident (CVA). Therefore, a patient with carotid artery atheroma should be thoroughly investigated to rule out the
possibility of risk of CVA. In this case, the patient had no other risk factors and signs of CVA. The pathogenesis of atheroma remains
unclear; however, current research suggested that cytokines and chemokines may develop the atheroma. Further studies are necessary to
provide a better understanding of the atheroma. The imaging modalities for carotid artery atheroma are carotid ultrasound, CT, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), and angiography. Ultrasound technology has made high-resolution imaging of atherosclerosis in the artery possible.
Especially, the use of contrast-enhanced ultrasound has become an accurate, safe, noninvasive imaging tool in the diagnosis of
atherosclerosis. Angiography has been known to underestimate the presence and severity of atherosclerosis. CT is a useful and reliable
imaging method for providing anatomic imaging from the aortic arch to the circle of Willis. CT is generally considered as the gold standard
imaging modality before surgical intervention. In addition, CT angiography is used in clinical practice for the assessment of
atherosclerotic plaque and degree. Recently, MRI has used to identify high-risk carotid plaque characteristics. In this case, we performed
ultrasound and CT scans. However, despite performing these radiologic examinations, the atheroma was mistaken for a parotid gland tumor. The
optimal treatment method for atheroma and atherosclerotic plaques remains unclear. In some cases, anticoagulation treatment may prevent
thrombus formation and cerebral embolism. However, we suggest that in some cases, surgical removal may be an appropriate procedure for
diagnosis and treatment of an external carotid artery atheroma, as in our patient. In conclusion, atheroma of the facial artery is an
extremely rare disease, and it can be confused with a parotid gland tumor. Clinicians should consider atheroma in the differential diagnosis
of tumors arising around the parotid gland. We report an extremely rare case of an atheroma arising from the facial artery, mimicking a
parotid gland tumor. Clinicians should consider atheroma in the differential diagnosis of tumors arising around the parotid gland.
Abbreviations: CT = Computed tomography, CVA = cerebrovascular accident. No acknowledgements have been disclosed for this article. No
sponsorships or competing interests have been disclosed for this article. The authors report no conflicts of interest.
