Dear Editor, The worldwide dissemination of New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase 1 (NDM-1), an Ambler class B metallo-β-lactamase (MBL) conferring
resistance to all β-lactams except monobactams, is of great concern for public health. NDM-4, which differs from NDM-1 by a single amino
acid substitution (Met154Leu), was demonstrated to possess increased carbapenemase activity.1 As an infrequent blaNDM allele, only several
sporadic cases of infections due to NDM-4-producing Escherichia coli have been described in India, Austria, and Europe.1, 2, 3 At present,
only one NDM-4 plasmid (pJEG027; GenBank accession NO KM400601) has been characterized.4 To understand the epidemiology and control the
spread of antibiotic-resistant pathogens, we have been investigating carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae from human patients in China.
Previously, we reported a high incidence (33.3%) and endemic spread of NDM-1-positive Enterobacteriaceae in Henan Province.5 Here we
describe the first NDM-4-producing E. coli ST410 isolate, which, to our knowledge, is the first case in China, and report the
characterization of the blaNDM-4 harboring IncX3 plasmid. E. coli 14–55 was obtained from a blood culture of a 14-year-old girl hospitalized
at The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou city, Henan province, on 6 June 2014. The girl did not have a history of
foreign travel. Susceptibility testing was initially performed by a Vitek 2 system (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France), and Minimum
Inhibitory Concentrations (MICs) were determined using the broth microdilution method and the agar dilution method (for fosfomycin)
following the CLSI guidelines, and the MIC results were interpreted according to the CLSI breakpoints.6 The European Committee on
Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing breakpoints (available at http://www.eucast.org/clinical_breakpoints/) were used for colistin and
tigecycline. E. coli 14–55 was resistant to all β-lactams, including imipenem and meropenem, fluoroquinolones, gentamicin and tetracycline,
and was susceptible to amikacin, fosfomycin, tigecycline and colistin (Supplementary Table S1). The modified Hodge test and the imipenem-
EDTA double-disk synergy test revealed that E. coli 14–55 was an MBL-producer.6 PCR and sequencing were performed to screen for the presence
of MBL genes, including blaIMP, blaNDM, and blaVIM; only blaNDM was detected.5 The complete coding sequence (CDS) of blaNDM was amplified
with a pair of primers (NDM-F: 5′-GAA TTC GCC CCA TAT TTT TGC; NDM-R: 5′-AAC GCC TCT GTC ACA TCG AAA T) that flanked the blaNDM gene, and
DNA sequencing revealed the presence of blaNDM-4 in E. coli 14–55. In addition, different β-lactamase encoding genes, including blaCTX-M-15,
blaSHV-12, blaTEM-1 and blaCMY-61, together with the qnrB gene were identified in the NDM-4 positive isolate E. coli 14–55.5 E. coli
phylogenetic group typing and multilocus sequence typing (MLST) showed that the isolate E. coli 14–55 belonged to phylogroup A and ST410.5,
7 At present, five E. coli STs (India: ST648; Italy and Denmark: ST405; Austria: ST167, ST4450, and ST101) have been identified carrying
blaNDM-4 worldwide.1, 2, 3 Thus, this study represents the first report of ST410 as a carrier of blaNDM-4. Notably, recent publications from
Germany and Italy described the clonal expansion of fluoroquinolone (FQ)-resistant CTX-M-15-producing E. coli ST410 in both human and animal
populations.8, 9 Our previous and current studies also identified E. coli ST410 clinical isolates co-harboring multiple resistance
determinants, including blaNDM (blaNDM-1/4), ESBLS (blaCTX-M-15, blaSHV-12/blaTEM-1) and ampC genes (blaCMY-30/blaCMY-61).5 In addition,
NDM-5 producing E. coli ST410 was recently detected in Egypt.10 These findings suggest that E. coli ST410 might be an emerging pandemic
clone similar to ST131 for the dissemination of CTX-M-15 or NDM encoding genes. This possibility remains to be examined from future
surveillance work. S1-PFGE and PCR-based plasmid replicon typing indicated E. coli 14–55 harbored three different plasmids that belonged to
the IncX3, IncFIA and IncFIB incompatibility groups.5, 11 (Supplementary Figure S1). Southern hybridization using digoxigenin-labeled
blaNDM-1-specific probes (Roche Applied Sciences, Germany) showed that blaNDM-4 was located on an approximately 50 kb plasmid in E. coli
14–55 (Supplementary Figure S1). Although the conjugal transfer of plasmids for E. coli 14–55 failed, the NDM-4 carrying plasmid belonging
to the IncX3 incompatibility group was successfully transformed into E. coli DH5α Electro-Cells (TaKaRa, Dalian, China) by electroporation
(Supplementary Figure S1). MICs for the transformant (named T55 in this study) are summarized in (Supplementary Table S1). To characterize
the IncX3-type NDM plasmid, 12 pairs of primers were designed based on a reference IncX3 plasmid named pNDM-HN380 (NC_019162) for the
mapping of the backbone regions (Supplementary Table S2), and the MDR regions were characterized by a primer walking method. The blaNDM-4
harboring plasmid in E. coli 14–55 (named pEC55-NDM-4) is 54 035 bp in size, with an average G+C content of 49.1%. The sequence data
revealed that pEC55-NDM-4 is highly similar (>99.99%) to plasmid pNDM-HN380, which is the first characterized blaNDM-1-harboring IncX3
plasmid of Klebsiella pneumoniae ST483 and was isolated in Hong Kong, with nucleotide changes from G to A at bp 4447, from T to G at 18
179 bp, from G to A at 21 656 bp, and from C to T at 23 844 bp (Figure 1).12 The point mutation at position T18,179 G corresponds to the
A460C mutation in blaNDM-1, leading to the occurrence of the blaNDM-4 allele. A comparative plasmid analysis between pEC55-NDM-4 and
pJEG027, which is the only completely sequenced NDM-4 plasmid of a K. pneumoniae strain isolated in Austria, provided support for Espedido
et al's hypothesis that pJEG027 might have arisen from a pNDM-HN380-like plasmid ancestor (for example, pEC55-NDM-4) through the events of a
different IS5 insertion and an IS26-mediated flanking deletion of cutA1-groL.4 Several recent studies revealed that the blaNDM-4 gene was
carried by plasmids belonging to different replicon types, including F, FII, L/M and X3 in E. coli and K. pneumoniae; however, only two
partial sequences of IncFII plasmids (accession NO KP826711 and KP826707) and one partial sequence of an IncX3 plasmid (accession NO
KP826709) except pJEG027 are available for the genetic context of blaNDM-4.2, 3, 13 The second completely sequenced blaNDM-4 carrying
plasmid pEC55-NDM-4, in our study, is nearly identical to the first characterized blaNDM-1-harboring IncX3 plasmid pNDM-HN380, further
suggesting that blaNDM-4 might have emerged on IncX3 plasmids via a point mutation in blaNDM-1. The occurrence of a pNDM-HN380-like plasmid
carrying blaNDM-4, in this study, together with recent observations of IncX3-type plasmids carrying different blaNDM alleles, including
blaNDM-1 (pNDM-HN380), blaNDM-4 (pJEG027), blaNDM-5 (pNDM_MGR194, pNDM5_0215 and pEc1929), and blaNDM-7 (pEC50-NDM7), in different countries
(Austria, India, China and Canada) and different species (K. pneumoniae, E. coli, Serratia marcescens, and Enterobacter hormaechei),4, 12,
14, 15 strongly indicates that IncX3 plasmids, which have a narrow host range in Enterobacteriaceae, might have played a major role in the
rapid global dissemination of NDM-type MBLs among Enterobacteriaceae. In summary, our study represents the first report of a NDM-4 producing
E. coli isolate recovered from a blood culture of a patient without a history of foreign travel. The FQ-resistant E. coli 14–55 with
multiple β-lactamase encoding genes, including blaNDM-4, blaCTX-M-15, blaSHV-12, blaTEM-1 and blaCMY-61, belonged to ST410, a potential
international clone for the dissemination of CTX-M-15. Further surveillance is thus warranted to monitor the future dissemination of
potentially endemic clones of ST410 that harbor blaNDM. The blaNDM-4 carrying IncX3 plasmid characterized in this study is nearly identical
to pNDM-HN380 (with blaNDM-1), which was reported in Hong Kong. This finding, together with recent observations of IncX3 plasmids carrying
different blaNDM alleles in different countries, further suggests that IncX3 plasmids might have become a common vehicle for the
dissemination of different NDM alleles among Enterobacteriaceae worldwide. This work was supported by grant 81501782 from the National
Natural Science Foundation of China, grant 152300410034 from the Research Project of Basic and Advanced Technology of Henan Province, and
grant 15B310014 from the Foundation of Henan Educational Committee. Nucleotide sequence accession number: The sequence of the blaNDM-4
carrying plasmid pEC55-NDM-4 was submitted to the GenBank database under the accession number KX470734. Supplementary Information for this
article can be found on the Emerging Microbes & Infections website (http://www.nature.com/emi) Click here for additional data file. Click
here for additional data file. Click here for additional data file. Comparison of linear plasmid maps of IncX3 plasmids harboring blaNDM:
pNDM-HN380 (blaNDM-1, JX104760), pEC55-NDM-4 (blaNDM-4, KX470734), pJE027 (blaNDM-4, KM400601). Light gray shading indicates homologous
regions, while dark gray shading indicates inversely displayed regions of homology. The different arrows indicate the positions, directions
of transcription and predicted function of the genes.
