Calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor (CEOT) is a rare benign neoplasia, locally aggressive, that tends to invade bone and adjacent soft
tissues. This case report describes the thirteenth known case of CEOT with maxillary sinus extension and the second one that also involves
the buccal vestibule mucosa with peculiar histopathological and immunohistochemical data. Here we report the case of a 45-year-old female
with a CEOT diagnosed and treated at the Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery Department, County Clinical Emergency Hospital of Craiova, Romania.
The clinical and imaging investigation revealed an intraosseous tumor developed from the left posterior maxilla with maxillary sinus and
buccal vestibule mucosa extension. Histopathology found an epithelium-rich CEOT variant, but with scattered S100 positive clear cells, focal
small rounded cementum-like deposits and areas with some degree of nuclear pleomorphism. The immunohistochemical investigations emphasised
its local aggressiveness behavior with involvement of multiple molecular mechanisms that underlie tumor invasiveness. A subtotal
maxillectomy was performed followed by defect reconstruction. We discuss the relevant clinicopathological features of an aggressive rare
case of CEOT with maxillary sinus extension and buccal vestibule mucosa involvement. The immunohistochemical study suggests its utility in
attempting to assess the degree of local tumor aggressiveness and thus in adopting the most efficient therapeutic attitude. Calcifying
epithelial odontogenic tumour (CEOT) is a rare benign epithelial odontogenic neoplasia that is characterized by the presence of amyloid-like
material that may become calcified . The first cases were reported by Thoma and Goldman in 1946 as an “adenoid adamantoblastoma”, and in
1971 the term “calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor” was generally accepted and adopted by the WHO . It is one of the least frequent
odontogenic tumors, its incidence ranging between 0.4 and 3% . Although it is a benign tumor, sometimes can be locally aggressive
infiltrating the surrounding jaw bones structures [5, 6], and even vital structures such as the brain . Furthermore, in English literature
it was reported a general recurrence rate ranging from 15 to 30%, mostly due to inadequate management [4, 8, 9]. On the other hand,
malignant transformation appears to be a rare event, with less than 10 cases reported so far [10, 11]. We report here a case of intraosseous
CEOT developed from the left posterior maxilla with maxillary sinus and buccal vestibule mucosa extension. A comprehensive
immunohistochemical study was performed concerning the local aggressive behavior of this tumor. A written informed consent was obtained from
the patient for research and publication purposes. A 45 year old female presented to our institution with a diffuse swelling of the left
maxilla which caused a mild tumefaction of the left cheek and obliteration of the buccal vestibule, left cheek pain during chewing with
auricular and temporal irradiation, and masticatory disorders. The patient reported the onset of symptoms about 3 weeks before, but the
exact duration of the swelling is not known. However, the patient remembered that about 3 years ago she was complaining of pain in the molar
region of left maxilla and she addressed to her dentist. Without X-ray examination it was decided for extraction of the 2nd molar which
presented palatal ectopia, but without caries and no abnormal mobility. Personal or family records were not significant, but noteworthy is
that she worked about 10 years as an industrial dyer. Extraoral examination revealed a mild diffuse swelling of the left cheek, most obvious
at the posterior side of the zygomatic region. It was painless and hard in consistency on palpation. Intraoral examination revealed a
diffuse swelling extending from the maxillary left first premolar to the tuberosity and retromolar regions that obliterated the buccal
vestibule (Fig. 1a). The overlying mucosa was stretched but intact. On palpation, at the level of maxillary alveolar process the swelling
was hard and painless but became fluctuating and slightly tender in the retromolar region.Fig. 1Clinico-radiological and gross pathological
features of the tumor. a Intraoral view of the tumor with expansion on upper left buccal vestibule obliterations. b Orthopantomogram showing
osteolytic image of left maxilla with few foci of calcifications. c Axial CT demonstrates radiolucency of the left maxilla that completely
obliterated the maxillary sinus and involvement of the alveolar process with erosion of the cortical plate and invasion of the adjacent soft
tissue. d Post-operative view of the lesion after surgical exposure. Gross features of the surgical specimens including the alveolar process
with corresponding teeth Clinico-radiological and gross pathological features of the tumor. a Intraoral view of the tumor with expansion on
upper left buccal vestibule obliterations. b Orthopantomogram showing osteolytic image of left maxilla with few foci of calcifications. c
Axial CT demonstrates radiolucency of the left maxilla that completely obliterated the maxillary sinus and involvement of the alveolar
process with erosion of the cortical plate and invasion of the adjacent soft tissue. d Post-operative view of the lesion after surgical
exposure. Gross features of the surgical specimens including the alveolar process with corresponding teeth Orthopantomogram showed a
radiolucent lesion involving the left maxillary tuberosity, alveolar process, and the maxillary sinus with erosion of lateral wall and floor
of the sinus (Fig. 1b). On computed tomography scan it was noticed an expansile, radiolucent lesion of the left maxilla (about 4 cm in
diameter) with scattered areas of calcification which completely obliterated the left maxillary sinus (Fig. 1c). The scan showed tumor
extension and involvement of the alveolar process (behind the first premolar with buccal cortical thinning, erosion and invasion of the soft
tissue from retromolar region), maxillary sinus (with erosion of lateral and nasal walls, and floor of the sinus) and palatine process.
Based on history, clinical and imaging findings, a provisional diagnosis of benign locally aggressive odontogenic neoplasm of the left
maxilla was considered. Under general anesthesia, a subtotal maxillectomy procedure was performed through Dieffenbach’s modification of
Weber–Fergusons incision followed by defect reconstruction. The surgical specimen included almost the entire left maxilla, respectively the
entire zygomatic process, the distal alveolar process with corresponding teeth, and limited area of the frontal and palatal processes,
measuring 4.5 × 4 × 3 cm in total (Fig. 1d). The tumor eroded the floor and anterolateral wall of the maxillary sinus, occupying the entire
left maxillary sinus being adherent to the lining mucosa but without its ulceration. Also, this tumor distorted the left alveolar process
starting from the second bicuspid tooth up to the retromolar area, destroying the left maxillary tuberosity and distal to the third molar
tooth becoming adherent to the vestibular mucosa but without its ulceration. The palatal process was partially involved but without palatal
fibromucosa invasion. The tumor itself was relatively well defined, with smooth surface and firm in consistency. On cut section it appeared
as solid, whitish gray with various amounts of calcification, and with sandy-like consistency. The tumor was composed of variable amounts of
polyhedral eosinophilic epithelial cell islands, cords and strands in a fibrous stroma. These neoplastic cells had well-defined boundaries,
intercellular bridges in focal areas and some degree of nuclear pleomorphism, including few bizarre nuclei (Fig. 2a). Between cells and
within tumoral stroma, there was a conspicuous homogeneous eosinophilic acellular material that stained positive for Congo red (Fig. 2b).
This material was confirmed as amyloid by examination in polarized light after Congo red staining, with the deposits exhibiting the
characteristically apple-green birefringence (Fig. 2c). Some of the small round-shaped amyloid-like entities undergone calcification and
only a few of them presented Liesegang rings. We also noticed the presence of areas with accentuated nuclear pleomorphism (Fig. 2d), some
multinucleated giant cells (Fig. 2e), scattered S100 positive clear cells (Fig. 2f), and few clear cells with intracytoplasmic PAS-positive
granules (glycogen). Altogether, the tumor did not raise the suspicion of another origin, as for example a primary or metastatic
intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma. In some areas, between neoplastic proliferations were also observed small rounded cementum-like
deposits (Fig. 2g). The tumor proliferations penetrated the cortical plates of maxillary bone invading the connective tissue of the
maxillary sinus mucosa and the vestibular mucosa but without involvement of the lining epithelium (Fig. 2h, i).Fig. 2The main
histomorphological features of the tumor. a The tumor was composed of polyhedral neoplastic cells with intercellular bridges and some degree
of nuclear pleomorphism (hematoxylin and eosin ; original magnification × 40). b Homogeneous eosinophilic acellular material between
neoplastic proliferations that stained positive for Congo red (Congo red stain; original magnification × 40). c Intercellular deposits with
apple-green birefringence on polarized light examination of the Congo red stained sample (original magnification × 40). d Tumor areas with
nuclear pleomorphism (H&E; original magnification × 40). e Tumor areas with nuclear pleomorphism and multinucleate giant cells (H&E;
original magnification × 40). f Scattered S100 positive clear cells between polyhedral neoplastic cells (immunostaining, original
magnification × 20). g Tumor comprises areas with cementum-like material (*) (H&E; original magnification × 10). h Tumor invasion of the
maxillary sinus mucosa without involvement of the lining epithelium (H&E; original magnification × 10). i Tumor invasion of vestibular
mucosa without involvement of the lining epithelium (H&E; original magnification × 10) The main histomorphological features of the tumor. a
The tumor was composed of polyhedral neoplastic cells with intercellular bridges and some degree of nuclear pleomorphism (hematoxylin and
eosin ; original magnification × 40). b Homogeneous eosinophilic acellular material between neoplastic proliferations that stained positive
for Congo red (Congo red stain; original magnification × 40). c Intercellular deposits with apple-green birefringence on polarized light
examination of the Congo red stained sample (original magnification × 40). d Tumor areas with nuclear pleomorphism (H&E; original
magnification × 40). e Tumor areas with nuclear pleomorphism and multinucleate giant cells (H&E; original magnification × 40). f Scattered
S100 positive clear cells between polyhedral neoplastic cells (immunostaining, original magnification × 20). g Tumor comprises areas with
cementum-like material (*) (H&E; original magnification × 10). h Tumor invasion of the maxillary sinus mucosa without involvement of the
lining epithelium (H&E; original magnification × 10). i Tumor invasion of vestibular mucosa without involvement of the lining epithelium
(H&E; original magnification × 10) The polyhedral neoplastic epithelial cells were diffusely cytoplasmic immunoreactive for CK 5/6 and CK19,
while the clear cells were negative for these epithelial markers, exhibiting a nuclear and cytoplasmic positivity for the anti-S100 protein.
Also the tumor polyhedral cells had an intense nuclear reactivity for p63, and with the cytoplasm slightly positive for vimentin, but
negative for α-smooth muscle actin. In order to explain its extremely aggressive behavior we investigated tumor cell immunoreactivity for a
number of markers related to tumor invasiveness, as listed in Table 1. Thus, we observed expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-1,
MMP-2, MMP-3, and MMP-9 mainly in the nuclei of tumor cells, while for MMP-3 and MMP-9 the immunoreactivity was also present in the
cytoplasm of tumor cells and in the amyloid deposits (Fig. 3a, b). In addition, collagen IV reactivity was detected as a linear pattern
around the tumor islands, sheets and nests but with variable thickness along the tumor tissue with discontinuities at the advancing edge
(Fig. 3c).Table 1Characteristics of the antibodies utilised in the studyAntibody nameCloneCompanyDilutionStaining patternMMP13B6Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Inc. Dallas, USA1:25NuclearMMP22C1Santa Cruz Biotechnology1:25NuclearMMP31B4Santa Cruz Biotechnology1:25Nuclear,
cytoplasmic,amyloidMMP92C3Santa Cruz Biotechnology1:25Nuclear, cytoplasmic,amyloidE-cadherinNCH-38Dako, Glostrup Denmark1:30Membranous,
cytoplasmicN-cadherin6G11Dako1:30Membranous, nuclearP- cadherinH-105Santa Cruz Biotechnology1:30Membranous, cytoplasmic, nuclearIntegrin
β14B7RSanta Cruz Biotechnology1:30Membranous (lost in some areas), cytoplasmicBeta-cateninβ-catenin-1Dako1:100Membranous,
cytoplasmicVimentinSP20Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA1:200CytoplasmicTwist 110E4E6Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar,
Germany1:1000NuclearSlug 11A6Novus Biologicals, Abingdon, UK1:50Nuclear, cytoplasmicCXCR4polyclonalThermo Scientific1:500Membranous,
cytoplasmic, nuclearPodoplaninD2-40Dako1:50MembranousCollagen IVCIV 22Dako1:50Basement membranesKi-67MIB-1Dako1:50NuclearCytokeratin
5/6D5/16 B4Dako1:50CytoplasmicCytokeratin19b170Leica Biosystems1:150CytoplasmicP637JULLeica
Biosystems1:25NuclearS100polyclonalDako1:500Cytoplasmic, nuclearActin (Smooth Muscle1A4Dako1:40CytoplasmicActin, Smooth
MusclepolyclonalThermo Scientific1:100Cytoplasmic Fig. 3Immunohistochemical patterns of the tumor. a–b Neoplastic epithelial cells with
strong nuclear and cytoplasmic staining for MMP-3 and MMP-9 (immunostaining, original magnification × 20). c Variable collagen IV reactivity
around neoplastic epithelial proliferations (immunostaining, original magnification × 20). d Neoplastic epithelial cells from tumor
advancing edge with strong membrane and cytoplasmic staining for Beta-catenin (immunostaining, original magnification × 20), e Neoplastic
epithelial cells from tumor advancing edge with strong membrane and nuclear staining for N-cadherin (immunostaining, original
magnification × 20). f Neoplastic epithelial cells from tumor advancing edge with E-cadherin (brown staining) and vimentin (red staining)
cytoplasmic colocalization (double immunostaining, original magnification × 20). g Neoplastic epithelial cells from tumor advancing edge
with strong cytoplasmic and nuclear reactivity for Slug 1 (immunostaining, original magnification × 20). h Neoplastic epithelial cells with
strong membrane, cytoplasmic and nuclear reactivity for CXCR4 (double immunohistochemical detection CXCR4-brown staining and vimentin- red
staining) (double immunostaining, original magnification × 20). i Podoplanin tumor cell reactivity, with a membranous pattern at the
advancing edge, mainly at the periphery of tumor proliferations (immunostaining, original magnification × 10) Characteristics of the
antibodies utilised in the study Immunohistochemical patterns of the tumor. a–b Neoplastic epithelial cells with strong nuclear and
cytoplasmic staining for MMP-3 and MMP-9 (immunostaining, original magnification × 20). c Variable collagen IV reactivity around neoplastic
epithelial proliferations (immunostaining, original magnification × 20). d Neoplastic epithelial cells from tumor advancing edge with strong
membrane and cytoplasmic staining for Beta-catenin (immunostaining, original magnification × 20), e Neoplastic epithelial cells from tumor
advancing edge with strong membrane and nuclear staining for N-cadherin (immunostaining, original magnification × 20). f Neoplastic
epithelial cells from tumor advancing edge with E-cadherin (brown staining) and vimentin (red staining) cytoplasmic colocalization (double
immunostaining, original magnification × 20). g Neoplastic epithelial cells from tumor advancing edge with strong cytoplasmic and nuclear
reactivity for Slug 1 (immunostaining, original magnification × 20). h Neoplastic epithelial cells with strong membrane, cytoplasmic and
nuclear reactivity for CXCR4 (double immunohistochemical detection CXCR4-brown staining and vimentin- red staining) (double immunostaining,
original magnification × 20). i Podoplanin tumor cell reactivity, with a membranous pattern at the advancing edge, mainly at the periphery
of tumor proliferations (immunostaining, original magnification × 10) Investigation of markers involved in cell adhesion showed a positive
reaction with prevailing membranous pattern in the tumor cells for E-, N- and P-cadherin, Integrin β1 and Beta-catenin. However, as a
peculiarity of the tumor advancing edge, where small groups or cords of infiltrating tumor cells were present, the staining pattern became
also cytoplasmic for all cadherins, Integrin β1 and Beta-catenin (Fig. 3d), and even nuclear for N- (Fig. 3e) and P-cadherin. In these areas
the membranous immunoreactivity decreased and at least for E-cadherin we noticed an increased cytoplasmic colocalization with vimentin
(Fig. 3f). Investigation of other markers involved in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition process revealed mostly a nuclear reactivity of
tumor cells for Twist 1 and Slug 1 (Fig. 3g) that seemed to be more intense at the advancing edge. Also, the chemokine receptor −4 (CXCR4)
reactivity was also noticed in tumor cells with membranous, cytoplasmic and even nuclear pattern (Fig. 3h) Moreover, the podoplanin tumor
cell reactivity, with a membranous pattern, was more obvious at the advancing edge, at the periphery of tumor proliferations (Fig. 3i).
However the Ki-67 labeling index in tumor cells was less than 3% and without any significant difference regarding the tumor topography. A
final diagnosis of intraosseous CEOT with maxillary sinus and buccal vestibule submucosa extension was made on the basis of the above
findings. After 12 months of follow-up, the patient did not present any clinical or radiographic evidences of recurrence. CEOT is a rare
benign odontogenic neoplasm of epithelial origin with locally aggressive behavior that so far does not exceed 200 reported cases . In our
experience this is the second case of CEOT from a total of 231 cases of odontogenic tumours diagnosed in our hospital since 1990. The
general epidemiological profile reported in the literature for this odontogenic tumor shows a mean age at presentation of 40 years, with no
gender predilection and mandible as the most commonly affected jaw bone . Similarly to other authors , our results indicated the
intermediary layer of the enamel organ as the most probable origin for this type of odontogenic tumor. One of the peculiarities of the
presented case is its intraosseous development in the left posterior maxilla with extraosseous involvement of maxillary sinus and buccal
vestibule mucosa. Reviewing the literature, we found other 12 cases of CEOT with an extension to the maxillary sinus, which are summarized
in Table 2. Thus, the present case is the thirteenth CEOT with maxillary sinus extension and the second one that also involved the buccal
vestibule mucosa. These aggressive CEOT tumors seem to develop at a median age of 35 years with no gender predilection, in association or
not with impacted teeth and no predilection for the right or left maxilla [4, 12–22]. Histopatologically they had the same features as a
conventional COET, only one case being reported with the clear cell variant and another one with the cystic variant. A particular feature of
the present case was the presence of scattered S100+ clear cells and deposits of cementum-like material. In more than half of these cases,
CEOT evolved extraosseous with extension in the adjacent soft tissues, and to the neighboring natural cavities (oral cavity, orbit, nasal
fossae, and ethmoidal air cells) [4, 12–22].Table 2Clinicopathological features of currently reported cases of CEOT involving the maxillary
sinusReferenceAgeGenderTeeth involvementMaxillary bone involvedExtraosseous extension besides maxillary sinusMicroscopic featuresFollow
upGon, 1965 35FemaleFirst molarRight maxillaNoConventionalNPStimson et al., 1968 35MaleThird molarLeft maxillaLeft nasal fossaNFNFLee et
al., 1992 27FemaleSecond premolarLeft maxillaNoConventional7 years.Bridle et al., 2006 30FemaleDisplacement of the second premolar and first
molarRight maxillaDisplacement of the eye globeConventionalNPGopalakrishnan et al., 2006 15MaleSecond molarLeft maxillaNasal cavity,
narrowing and compressing the inferior meatusCystic variant1 yearMohtasham et al., 2008 18MaleNoRight maxillaNoneConventionalNPda Rosa et
al., 2011 33FemaleNoLeft maxillaLateral wall of nasal cavity, soft tissue, masseter, orbicularis oris, medial pterygoidConventionalNPSahni
et al., 2012 52MaleNoRight maxillaNoConventional and clear cell3 yearsMüller et al., 2012 36MaleNoRight maxillaNoConventional4 yearsCarrero
et al., 2014 69MaleThird molarLeft maxillaNoConventional8 yearsForoughi et al., 2015 34FemaleNoRecurrence in left maxillaOrbit and ethmoidal
air cells superiorly and the nasal airway mediallyConventional8 yearsRani et al., 2016 48FemaleNoRight maxillaConnective tissue of oral
mucosalConventional1 yearPresent case45FemalePalatal ectopia of the second molarLeft maxillaBuccal vestibule mucosaConventional with few
clear cells and cementum-like components0.6 years NP Not Performed, NF Not Found Clinicopathological features of currently reported cases of
CEOT involving the maxillary sinus NP Not Performed, NF Not Found It is well know that this odontogenic tumor can be locally aggressive, and
exhibit up to 15% recurrence rates, especially in cases treated by conservative techniques . Throughout time several prognostic factor have
been proposed to predict the behavior of such tumors and to estimate their recurrence risk. Thereby, clinical features such as size,
anatomic site, and health status of the patient have been shown to influence prognosis of these tumors [4, 12]. It is widely accepted that
maxillary CEOTs tend to be more aggressive and involve much easier the surrounding vital structures than mandibular tumors. As it is also
mentioned in the literature, and as well as in our case, amyloid deposits were not very abundant, with calcifications being even less
present, a fact that might suggest a more aggressive behavior . Also, CEOTs with clear cells seem to be more aggressive, with a higher rate
of recurrence (22%) and frequently associated with cortical bones perforation . In the present case we showed that few S100+ cells were
scattered between eosinophilic polygonal neoplastic cells. This reactivity reflects the dendritic nature of these cells and their clear cell
morphology could be an effect of tumor microenvironment on the Langerhans cells migrating in the tumor as a result of the host’s immune
response . Such morphological changes could represent a mechanism by which tumours can escape immune surveillance and gain a more aggressive
biologic behavior. For a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms that underlie the aggressiveness of this odontogenic tumor we
planned to investigate the expression patterns of a number of markers known to be involved in tumor invasiveness. First we have checked the
tumor cells reactivity for the main MMPs (MMP-1, −2, −3, −4) known to be involved in extracellular matrix remodeling. Thus we noticed a
tumor nuclear reactivity for all MMPs but with high intensity especially for MMP-3 and MMP-9, which were also expressed in the cytoplasm and
within amyloid deposits. Henriques et al. found a higher MMP9 expression both in tumor cells and stroma, for keratocystic odontogenic tumors
and ameloblastomas, that might justify their locally aggressive behavior. The nuclear tumor cell expression for the all 4 investigated MMPs
reported by us might also be linked to new functional roles, such as activation of some cancer-related signaling pathways that could promote
tumor proliferation, and most likely invasion and metastasis . Moreover, studying the collagen IV expression, we noticed absence or
discontinuity in reactivity at the invasion front, a fact that could justify the local aggressiveness of the presented case. Other studies
pointed out that collagen IV expression could be correlated with the growth and aggressiveness of odontogenic tumors [26, 28]. Thus MMP-9
and collagen IV could be useful markers in assessing the degree of local aggressiveness of these odontogenic tumors, including the CEOTs.
Investigating the epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) process, we have found that tumor cells were reactive for all investigated
cadherins, for Integrin β1 and Beta-catenin with a gradual transition from the membranous pattern to a cytoplasmic pattern toward the
advancing edge. In addition, we have observed even a nuclear reactivity for N- and P-cadherin. Moreover, as a sign of active EMT, we found
an increased cytoplasmic reactivity for vimentin and a prevailing nuclear Twist 1 and Slug 1 expression in tumor cells, especially at the
tumor’s advancing edge. Our results were confirmed in the literature by cases of ameloblastomas, where it was also been noticed an
E-cadherin downregulation simultaneously with an upregulation of podoplanin, β-catenin, and CD44v6 at the tumor advancing edges, suggesting
their involvement in mediating collective cell migration and local invasiveness . Moreover, it has been reported that transcription factors
such as Snail, Slug, SIP1, and Twist could have differential roles in mediating local invasiveness in ameloblastomas . Also, in the present
study we have observed a podoplanin expression at the advancing edge, mainly at the periphery of tumor proliferations, suggesting its
involvement in tumor invasiveness. In fact, it is well known that this transmembrane sialomucin is involved in odontogenesis and in
promoting local invasion of various odontogenic tumors . A series of studies reported the role of CXCR4 in modulation of cancer cells
migration in several human malignancies, especially due to increase production of MMPs [31, 32]. Here we have observed membrane and nuclear
CXCR4 reactivity in CEOT cells regardless of tumor topography (tumor center versus the advancing edge), suggesting the involvement of this
chemokine in mediating locally tumor cell invasion or even a potential malignant evolution of this tumor. However, despite its aggressive
behavior, we found that less than 3% of tumor cells were positive to Ki-67, a value that falls within the range (0.27–10%) reported by the
literature for this kind of tumors . Higher values were recorded in CEOTs with malignant transformation, with at least three-fold increase
in the suspected malignant area compared to benign areas . A reduced level of Ki-67 index together with the absence of any clinical finding
of metastasis, with no vascular invasion or atypical mitotic figures, justifies the benign character of the tumor in the current case.
Summarizing our results we can conclude that the peculiar locally aggressive behavior of the presented case is the result of the involvement
of multiple molecular mechanisms. Thus investigating such biomarkers could be useful in assessing the degree of local aggressiveness and
even the malignant potential of these odontogenic tumors, suggesting also the most efficient type of therapeutical approach. This case
report describes the thirteenth known case of CEOT with maxillary sinus extension and the second one that also involves the buccal vestibule
mucosa. Histopathologically, this case corresponds to an epithelium-rich CEOT variant, but with scattered S100+ clear cells and deposits of
cementum-like material. The immunohistochemical investigation confirms its aggressive behavior by tumor overexpression of biomarkers
involved especially in extracellular matrix degradation, cell adhesion and the EMT processes, and even a potential malignant evolution of
this tumor. However, our case did not fulfill the other criteria of malignancy thus was deemed a benign tumor. A radical surgery resection
with defect reconstruction was performed and after 12 months following the treatment there was no signs of recurrence. Calcifying epithelial
odontogenic tumor Cytokeratin Computed tomography Chemokine receptor type 4 Epithelial to mesenchymal transition Hematoxylin and eosin
Matrix metalloproteinase Periodic acid–Schiff The authors gratefully thank the patient for her cooperation. There was no funding for this
article. Data and materials of this work are available on request by the corresponding author. Study concepts and study design: ClM, Data
acquisition: CM, AC, AES. Quality control of data and algorithms: ClM, DNP. Data analysis and interpretation: ClM, CM. Manuscript
preparation: AC, AES. Manuscript editing: CM, AES. Manuscript review: ClM, Corresponding author: DP. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. CM and AC: co-first author. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written and informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. The study was approved by the Committee of Ethics and
Academic and Scientific Deontology of the University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova (reference number: 72/11.07.2016).
