Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 78 Final Diagnosis: Dementia with Lewy body Symptoms: Dizziness • sycope
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Geriatrics Unusual setting of medical care Postprandial hypotension, induced by an absorption
of glucose from intestine, could be treated by acarbose; however, it was unclear whether dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor reduced
postprandial hypotension. A 78-year-old woman who had experienced episodes of dizziness and hypotension after eating was admitted to our
hospital. During 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, there were repeated episodes of marked postprandial hypotension; i.e., a
significant systolic blood pressure reduction within two hours after eating (from ‒58 to ‒64 mm Hg after meals). The patient was diagnosed
with dementia with Lewy bodies. The patient exhibited postprandial hyperglycemia and hypotension after a 75 g oral glucose tolerance test.
After the administration of 25 mg sitagliptin, the patient’s postprandial and orthostatic hypotension was reduced remarkably. Moreover, her
Mini-Mental State Examination score subsequently increased (from 22 to 25 points). The dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor sitagliptin can
delay postprandial increases in glucose levels and hypotensive episodes, as well as sympathetic nervous system abnormalities and orthostatic
hypotension. Postprandial hypotension and orthostatic hypotension can cause syncope and falls in elderly patients, leading to cognitive
decline and a reduction in quality of life. One of the causes of postprandial hypotension is carbohydrate ingestion. Carbohydrates in the
intestine increase mesenteric arterial blood flow and reduce systemic venous flow, which leads to reductions in cardiac output and systemic
blood pressure. In patients with autonomic nervous system dysfunction, delayed systemic blood pressure responses to increased mesenteric
arterial flow can cause postprandial hypotension, and α-glucosidase inhibitors such as acarbose have been reported to improve postprandial
hypotension . In a recent case report, it was reported that dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors can also ameliorate postprandial
hypotension . However, there have not been any reports about the relationship between postprandial glucose levels before and after the
administration of DPP-4 inhibitors in patients with autonomic nervous system dysfunction due to dementia with Lewy bodies. Moreover, it is
unclear whether DPP-4 inhibitors improve orthostatic hypotension and/or postprandial hypotension. A 78-year-old woman, who was suffering
from dizziness after meals, was admitted to our hospital. The patient had a previous history of hypertension and ischemic stroke (from the
right external capsule to the putamen) six months earlier, and after her stroke, she had dizziness and faintness after meals and also
experienced postprandial systolic blood pressure reductions (from 130 mm Hg to 80 mm Hg). Her family felt that she was suffering from
cognitive impairment. The patient was referred to our hospital to have her postprandial hypotension evaluated and managed. No abnormalities
were observed during her physical examinations. The findings of her blood examinations are shown in Table 1. Cardiomegaly was not observed
on a chest x-ray, and an electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm. No significant stenosis was detected in the carotid arteries on
echosonography. The results of the patient’s 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring are shown in Figure 1. The patient’s systolic
blood pressure dropped from 143 mm Hg to 77 mm Hg at 30 minutes after meals, which was suggestive of marked postprandial hypotension. She
also exhibited orthostatic hypotension (a reduction in systolic blood pressure from 160 mm Hg to 120 mm Hg) in the head-up tilt test (Figure
2). In an evaluation of the patient’s heart rate variability during standing up and sitting down (Kiritsu Meijin, Crosswell Inc., Kanagawa,
Japan), a reduced sympathetic nervous system activity response, which was measured as the change in the low frequency (LF)/high frequency
(HF) power ratio observed after standing up, was detected (Table 2). In metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy, a reduced heart-to-
mediastinum uptake ratio (H/M ratio) was observed (1.77 on early images and 1.09 on delayed images), which was indicative of reduced
sympathetic nervous function in the heart (Figure 3). In addition, the patient’s Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score was 22 points,
and she was considered to be suffering from cognitive impairment without Parkinsonism. The patient was diagnosed with dementia with Lewy
bodies based on the following findings: (1) rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, (2) autonomic nervous system dysfunction, (3) a
reduced H/M ratio on MIBG scintigraphy, and (4) an abnormal pattern on a dopamine transporter (DAT) scan (Figure 4). The results obtained by
continuous blood pressure monitoring (Arteriograph24, TensioMed, Hungary) during the 75 g oral glucose ingestion test are shown in Table 3.
The patient exhibited a blood pressure reduction at 30 minutes after the ingestion of 75 g oral glucose, which was not affected by her serum
insulin levels, and she also displayed postprandial hyperglycemia. On the other hand, the patient did not demonstrate a reduction in blood
pressure after the intravenous administration of 20 mL 20% glucose (Table 3), which suggested that the absorption of glucose from the
intestine, rather than glucose in the blood, played an important role in the causative mechanism of the patient’s postprandial hypotension.
The patient was prescribed 25 mg of the DPP-4 inhibitor sitagliptin to be taken just after she woke. During her subsequent 24-hour
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (Figure 5), it was found that the magnitude of her postprandial hypotension had reduced, especially
after breakfast (‒33 mm Hg) and after lunch (‒33 mm Hg). Furthermore, her postprandial blood pressure did not fall below 100 mm Hg, and she
did not complain of dizziness. In addition, the patient did not exhibit orthostatic hypotension during the head-up tilt test (Figure 6). In
the 75 g oral glucose ingestion test, no blood pressure reduction was seen after the ingestion of glucose (Table 3). In a heart rate
variability analysis performed during standing up and sitting down, an improvement in sympathetic nervous system activation; i.e., the
change in the LF/HF ratio observed after standing up, was detected (Table 2). However, the H/M ratio detected on MIBG scintigraphy did not
change after the patient started taking sitagliptin (Figure 7). After the patient’s postprandial and orthostatic hypotensive episodes
ceased, her cognitive impairment; i.e., her MMSE score, improved (22 points to 25 points). Even after one year of initiation of sitagliptin,
the patient did not experience faintness or dizziness after meals. During her 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, her postprandial
hypotension reduced remarkably (Figure 8). Additionally, the patient did not have any hypoglycemic episodes during the follow-up period. We
experienced a case in which the patient exhibited postprandial and orthostatic hypotension due to autonomic nervous system dysfunction
associated with dementia with Lewy bodies. In this patient, the ingestion of glucose that led to postprandial hypotension was found to play
an important role in the mechanism responsible for the postprandial hypotension. The administration of sitagliptin, a DPP-4 inhibitor,
reduced the patient’s postprandial hypotension, and moreover, it reduced orthostatic hypotension by increasing sympathetic nervous system
activation. The amelioration of the patient’s hypotensive episodes also resulted in an improvement in her cognitive function. The mechanism
responsible for postprandial hypotension is poorly understood. The intake of carbohydrates induces the secretion of insulin and neurotensin,
which in turn increase mesenteric arterial flow and portal venous flow, leading to peripheral vascular dilatation. Patients with autonomic
nervous system dysfunction display delay compensatory blood pressure rises and are likely to suffer hypotensive episodes. Recently, Vanis et
al. reported that the administration of saline to the stomach did not induce postprandial hypotension, but the administration of glucose
did. These findings showed that the postprandial hypotension induced by glucose was not caused by dilation of the gastroenterological
system, which is considered to cause hypotension and dumping syndrome. Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) secretion might affect the causative
mechanism of postprandial hypotension, as GLP-1 was reported to enhance glucose-dependent insulin secretion and to delay gastric emptying.
In this present case report, the patient’s orthostatic hypotension was reduced, but the mechanism responsible for this was unclear. The
reactivity of the patient’s sympathetic nervous system, which was measured as the change in the LF/HF ratio observed after standing up, was
improved after the administration of sitagliptin. No previous studies have found that DPP-4 inhibitors attenuate autonomic function, and
therefore, we need to clarify the mechanism responsible for this by further study of patients. In patients with dementia with Lewy bodies,
postprandial and orthostatic hypotension contributes to cognitive decline. However, these aspects of the condition might be treatable. It
has been reported that excessively low blood pressure in medicated hypertensive patients was associated with cognitive impairment . The
administration of α-glucosidase inhibitors or DPP-4 inhibitors could be used to prevent excessive blood pressure reductions in patients with
autonomic dysfunction. Additionally, some experimental studies have demonstrated that GLP-1 agonists and DPP-4 inhibitors had direct
neuronal effects, leading to improvement of cognitive function . We report on a case of postprandial hypotension and orthostatic hypotension
due to autonomic dysfunction in a patient with dementia with Lewy bodies. The administration of the DPP-4 inhibitor sitagliptin improved the
patient’s postprandial hypotensive episodes, as well as her episodes of orthostatic hypotension, by modifying the reactivity of her
sympathetic nervous system. The patient did not suffer any adverse effects of sitagliptin treatment. The amelioration of the patient’s
hypotensive episodes led to an improvement in her cognitive function. 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring before the administration
of sitagliptin. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring was performed at 15-minute intervals for 24 hours. Head-up tilt test results obtained
before the administration of sitagliptin. Blood pressure was measured using an automatic cuff-oscillometric device at 5-minute intervals.
H/M ratio on MIBG scintigraphy before the administration of sitagliptin. The patient’s DAT scans. 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure
monitoring after the administration of sitagliptin. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring was performed at 15-minute intervals for 24 hours.
Head-up tilt test results obtained after the administration of sitagliptin. Blood pressure was measured using an automatic cuff-
oscillometric device at 5-minute intervals. H/M ratio on MIBG scintigraphy after the administration of sitagliptin. 24-hour ambulatory blood
pressure monitoring, under the administration of sitagliptin, after one-year follow-up. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring was performed
at 30-minute intervals for 24 hours. Characteristics and blood examination of the patient. Data in the parenthesis shows normal values.
Changes in heart rate variability measures after standing-up. Changes in blood pressure, blood glucose, and insulin level after 75 g oral
glucose ingestion or intravenous administration of 20% glucose 20 mL.
