Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Case series Patients: Female, 19 • Female, 18 Final Diagnosis: Solid pseudopapillary tumor of
pancreas Symptoms: Abdominal discomfort Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Surgery Specialty: Oncology Unusual setting of medical care Solid
pseudopapillary tumor of the pancreas (Frantz tumor) is a rare, low-grade malignant neoplasm. Laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy is a good
approach for tumors located in the pancreatic head. We present two successful cases in young women. A 19-year-old woman was admitted to
Department of Digestive Surgery due to epigastric pain, nausea, and vomiting. Computed tomography scan of the abdomen was performed, and a
3.0×2.2 cm solid tumor localized in the head of the pancreas was observed. After the diagnosis of Frantz tumor of the pancreas, the patient
underwent laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy. Histopathology confirmed solid and cystic pseudopapillary tumor. The postoperative course was
uneventful, and after 8 months the patient remained disease-free. An 18-year-old woman was admitted at the emergency room with abdominal
pain, vomiting, and diarrhea. Computed tomography scans revealed a mass of 4.1×3.3 cm in size in the head of the pancreas consistent with a
solid pseudopapillary tumor. Laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy was performed by two expert surgeons who divided the work: one did resection
and the other did reconstruction. The patient was discharged at postoperative day 6 without complications, and during five months of follow-
up the patient has been well and without disease. Laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy can be performed safely in patients with Frantz tumor
by surgeons with expertise in laparoscopic surgery, technical skill, and adequate equipment. Solid pseudopapillary tumor of the pancreas,
known as Frantz tumor, is a rare clinical pathologic condition and occurs predominantly in women. Degenerative cystic changes are commonly
observed and capsule is common. First described by Virginia K. Frantz, it is a tumor defined as a low-grade malignant neoplasm of the
exocrine pancreas. The majority of patients are young females, and the tumor is located in the body and tail (67%) and head (32%) of the
pancreas. Most of the tumors are asymptomatic until they become large. The diagnosis can be made by computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging. Surgical resection is the treatment for all cystic tumors of the pancreas, and the approach is most dependent on location
of the tumor. For tumors located in the pancreatic head, the surgery is pancreatoduodenectomy . Laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy is
classified as a complicated surgical procedure and is only performed in some specialized centers. However, it has been demonstrated to be a
safe and feasible surgery. Some factors are responsible for a safe pancreatoduodenectomy . These factors are the careful selection of the
patient, skill in laparoscopic surgical technique, laparoscopic equipment and instruments, and experience with open pancreatoduodenectomy .
The aim of this study is to present two selected cases of laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy in patients with Frantz tumor of the pancreas.
A 19-year-old woman, body mass index (BMI) 20 kg/m2, was admitted to Department of Digestive Surgery due to back pain, epigastric pain,
nausea, vomiting, and weight loss (8 kg in 9 months). An abdominal computed tomography scan showed a 3×2.2 cm solid tumor localized into the
head of the pancreas, near the inferior vena cava. A magnetic resonance image confirmed a solid and cystic tumor in the uncinate process and
the diagnosis of solid pseudopapillary tumor of the pancreas (Figure 1). On examination, the patient had no jaundice, and no abdominal mass
was palpable. Tumor markers like CA19-9, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), Beta-HCG, and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) were normal. Laboratory tests
were normal except for hemoglobin 11 g/dL. Cardiovascular evaluation was normal, and the patient underwent laparoscopic
pancreatoduodenectomy. The patient was placed in a supine position with a reverse Trendelenburg and the surgeon positioned between the legs
of the patient. Six trocars were placed under direct vision and pneumoperitoneum was maintained with CO2 at 13 mm Hg. The
pancreatoduodenectomy was performed with division of the pancreas at the neck, bile duct divided above the cystic duct, and stomach resected
near the pylorus using a linear stapler, without pylorus preservation (Figure 2). The reconstruction was carried out with two-layer
invagination pancreatojejunostomy with a tube inside the pancreatic duct, running suture hepatico-jejunostomy, and stapled
gastrojejunostomy. Two silicone drains were placed, and the specimen was removed through a small incision in the pelvis. The operative time
was 6 hours and no blood transfusion was given. Histopathology confirmed a 3.5×2.5 cm pancreatic solid and cystic pseudopapillary tumor,
hemorrhagic areas, and clear resection margins (Figure 3). The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged 8 days
after the first procedure. After 8 months of follow-up, the patient remained well and disease-free. An 18-year-old woman, BMI 19 kg/m2, was
admitted at the emergency room with complaints of abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Her past medical history was unremarkable.
On physical examination some discomfort and upper abdominal pain were observed. The rest of the examination was normal. Laboratory
evaluation was normal. Upper abdominal ultrasonography and computed tomography scans revealed a solid mass of 4.1×3.3 cm in size in the head
and uncinate process of the pancreas, and the diagnosis of solid pseudopapillary tumor of the pancreas was made (Figure 4). There was no
biliary or pancreatic duct dilation. The tumor markers (α-fetoprotein, CA19-9, carcinoembryonic antigen, and human chorionic gonadotropin)
were normal. The preoperative evaluation was normal, and the patient underwent laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy. Laparoscopic
pancreatoduodenectomy was performed by two expert surgeons who divided the work: one did resection and the other did reconstruction. After
the patient was placed in a supine position with reverse Trendelenburg, six trocars were placed under direct vision. The gastrocolic omentum
was dissected to access the lesser sac. The superior mesenteric vein and portal vein were dissected to isolate the pancreas, which was
divided (Figure 5). The Kocher maneuver was carried out and the duodenum was transected using a linear stapler without pylorus preservation.
The biliary tract was dissected and transected above the cystic duct. Complete lymphadenectomy was carried out. The reconstruction was
carried out in a classic single loop with the pancreas (invagination), with a tube inside the pancreatic duct to facilitate the anastomosis,
followed by the bile duct (duct-to-mucosa) and stomach using a linear stapler. Two silicone drains were placed, and a small incision in the
pelvic region was made to remove the specimen (Figure 6). The operative time was 10 hours and no blood transfusion was given. The
pathological examination of the specimen revealed a pancreatic solid and cystic pseudopapillary tumor of 3.9×3.2 cm in size, with negative
margins (Figure 7) and no evidence of metastases in the lymph nodes. The patient was discharged at postoperative day 6 without
complications, and during five months of follow-up she has been well, without disease, and the final appearance of the abdomen was good
(Figure 8). Solid pseudopapillary tumor of pancreas is a rare condition and represents 0.2–2.7% of malignant tumors of the pancreas.
Histologically the tumor contains proportions of pseudo-papillary, solid, and cystic components. The tumor is encapsulated and well
circumscribed with degenerative cystic cavities and hemorrhages . Gagner and Pomp performed the first laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy in
1994 . After more than 20 years this procedure is only performed in some specialized centers . Acceptance is still slow due to inherent
technical limitations and the need for skills in advanced laparoscopic surgery, which is not always possible for hepato-pancreatobiliary
surgeons. However, this procedure is safe and feasible. The selection of the patients, experience in open pancreatoduodenectomy, and skill
in laparoscopic surgery are important factors for the success of this procedure . In the present study, we reviewed two successful
laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomies due to solid pseudopapillary tumor of the pancreas in young women. The selection of the patients is
extremely important. The ideal candidates for laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy include patients with low-grade tumors, without vascular
invasion, without obesity, without previous surgery, and not affected by comorbidities . In these cases the patients were young, had
excellent general health, had no history of previous surgery, had no invasion of mesenteric vein, portal vein, or surrounding tissues, and
had no lymph nodes metastases. Surgeons who want to perform the procedure should have the motivation and capacity to pursue innovation and
accept challenge. Moreover, laparoscopic instruments and equipment like the ultrasonic knife, bipolar cautery, and stapler are necessary to
perform the procedure properly. Each of these instruments has a different utility . Surgical expertise in conventional pancreatoduodenectomy
and knowledge about vascular anatomy, both normal and variations, are necessary. The laparoscopic technique includes dissection and
reconstruction. During the resection, the possibility of bleeding during the dissection with an ultrasonic device is low. Correct evaluation
of the vascular anatomy before the operation is important to reduce major injuries and the need for blood transfusion and conversion. For
reconstruction, the surgeon needs the ability to perform laparoscopic suturing and surgical knots . Pancreatojejunostomy can be performed
with duct-mucosa technique or invagination. Duct-mucosa anastomosis is suitable in patients with a pancreatic duct of 3 mm or more in
diameter. The laparoscopic visualization of the pancreatic duct is better than in open surgery . In these cases we performed invagination of
the pancreas with a tube inside the pancreatic duct, and we did not observe a pancreatic leak. Bile duct anastomosis is possible even in a
small duct. In this situation running suturing is not indicated due to the risk of biliary stenosis. Finally, for gastrojejunostomy, the
linear stapler makes the procedure feasible, fast, and safe. The risk of fistula after stapled gastroenteric anastomosis is low. To minimize
complications, the procedure should be performed by two expert surgeons who divide the work: one doing resection and the other doing
reconstruction. . An important difficulty related to laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy is vascular dissection. In case of vascular
invasion, the procedure is more complex laparoscopically . In the present study there was no vascular involvement, the tumor had a low grade
of malignancy, the lymph nodes were clear, and resection was possible in both cases. Laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy is associated with
rapid recovery and shorter hospitalization. Moreover, the mortality rate is similar to that of open pancreatoduodenectomy . Another
advantage of laparoscopic pancreatoduodenectomy that should be taken into consideration in these cases is the cosmetic results. The present
cases, two young women with low-grade malignant tumors of the pancreas and no previous operations, certainly had good outcomes. Laparoscopic
pancreatoduodenectomy is an effective and safe procedure, can achieve perioperative outcomes similar to those of open surgery, and can be
performed safely in selected patients as in these cases, particularly by surgeons experienced in advanced laparoscopy. This procedure does
require laparoscopic technical skill and adequate equipment. Conflict of interest statement The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest. Ethical standards Ethical approval was not required, and patient identifying knowledge was not presented in this report. Solid
pseudopapillary tumor in the head of the pancreas. Specimen with tumor in the head of the pancreas. Histopathology with pseudopapillary
pattern, cystic degeneration, and hemorrhage (HE 100×). Cystic and solid pseudopapillary tumor in the head of the pancreas. Dissection of
superior mesenteric vein and portal vein. Specimen with tumor in the head of the pancreas. Histopathology-confirmed surgical margin, well
delimited (HE 100×). Final aspect of the abdomen five months after the procedure.
