Brain perfusion single photon computed tomography (SPECT) is a functional imaging modality and has been widely utilized in evaluation of
various kinds of neurological disorders. Easy z-score imaging system (eZIS) is a computer-assisted statistical analysis, based on the
comparison with age-classified ethyl cysteinate dimer (ECD) normal database, which provides objectively interpretation of Tc-99m ECD brain
perfusion SPECT. Here we presented a 64-year-old male with dizziness, spin sensation, nausea, and vomiting in the emergency room, and brain
computed tomography scan showed only small hypodensity lesion in cerebellum. Tc-99m ECD SPECT was performed for evaluating occult cerebral
ischemia, infarction, and/or degeneration, but no remarkable abnormality could be identified by experienced readers on conventional display.
The result of eZIS showed remarkable hypoperfusion in cerebellum and mild hypoperfusion in bilateral frontal and parietal lobes. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed severe atrophy of anterior cerebellar lobe. In addition, MRI showed diffuse hypointensity signals along
with cerebrospinal fluid spaces, especially those areas with hypoperfusion on SPECT, compatible with typical appearances of superficial
siderosis. This presented case demonstrates the value of software analysis with eZIS on enhancing the diagnostic value of brain perfusion
SPECT for detecting brain lesions at an uncommon location due to a rare disease. As a functional neurological imaging modality, brain
perfusion single photon computed tomography (SPECT) is useful for evaluations of cerebrovascular disease, epileptic disorder, and
neurodegenerative disease. However, the visual interpretations of brain SPECT were less intuitive in comparison with anatomical images (such
as computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging ), more subjective and less reproducible. In order to overcome these drawbacks,
computer-assisted stereotactic approaches, such as 3-dimensional stereotactic surface projection and easy z-score imaging system (eZIS), had
been developed. These software analyzed the patient's images by voxel-to-voxel comparisons with those from age-matched normal database, and
then generated z-score images as a more objective and reliable assessments of functional abnormalities. In this report, we presented a rare
case of superficial siderosis (SS) with severe atrophy of anterior cerebellar lobe, which was initially missed by visual interpretation of
the brain perfusion SPECT images but was evidently demonstrated on the result of eZIS analysis. A 64-year-old male was initially presented
with dizziness with spin sensation on and off for 2 days, and then he was sent to emergency room due to further development of nausea and
vomiting. Brain CT scan was ordered for assessing possible cerebral vascular accident; however, only some low-attenuation areas were noted
in right cerebellum, favoring prior sequela lesion (Fig. 1). Brain computed tomography scan showed only some low attenuations in right
cerebellum, favoring prior sequela lesion. Reviewing the patient's past medical history, there were only essential hypertension and type-2
diabetes under regular medical control. Lab tests were all normal except for the only abnormality of hyperlipidemia. Neurological
examinations revealed multidirection nystagmus, bilateral hearing impairment, wide-based gait, and dysarthria. Tc-99m ECD brain perfusion
SPECT was performed for evaluating occult cerebral ischemia, infarction, and/or degeneration. However, no remarkable abnormality could be
identified on conventional display of SPECT images. Surprisingly, further software analysis by “eZIS” showed some remarkable hypoperfusion
in the anterior lobe of cerebellum (Fig. 2). In addition, mild grade of hypoperfusion was noted in superficial areas of bilateral
cerebellum, bilateral frontal, and parietal lobes (blue, green, and yellow colors mean z-score higher than 2 but less than 6), along with
the spaces of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). On conventional display of Tc-99m ECD brain perfusion single photon computed tomography (SPECT)
(left column), no remarkable abnormality could be identified on SPECT images by readers of more than 5 experienced nuclear medicine
physicians. The results of easy z-score imaging system analysis showed remarkable hypoperfusion at anterior lobe of cerebellum, in which red
color on the fused magnetic resonance imaging template means Z-score higher than 6 (right column). In addition, mild grade of hypoperfusion
in superficial areas of bilateral cerebellum, bilateral frontal, and parietal lobes (blue, green, and yellow colors means Z-score higher
than 2 but less than 6). In order to elucidate the nature of hypoperfusion abnormalities shown on SPECT, brain MRI was performed for further
correlation. The T2-weighted images showed diffuse hypointensity signals along with the CSF spaces, most severe in the cerebellar folia
(Fig. 3A), and also around pons (Fig. 3A), interhemispheric fissure (Fig. 3B), lower interhemispheric fissure, Sylvian fissure (Fig. 3C),
and spinal cord (Fig. 3D), consistent with typical appearances of hemosiderin deposition. In addition, remarkable atrophy of anterior
cerebellar lobe was noted, explaining the reason of severe hypoperfusion shown on brain SPECT. In combinations of all the clinical and
imaging findings, a final diagnosis of SS was made. Because this report just reviewed previous data and did not involve any human trials,
there is no need to conduct special ethic review, and the ethical approval is not necessary. Informed consent was signed by the patient for
the publication of this report and its related images. Axial T2-weighted brain magnetic resonance imaging showed diffuse hypointensity
signals (white arrows) along with the cerebrospinal fluid spaces, most severe in the cerebellar folia (A), and also around pons (A), higher
interhemispheric fissure (B), lower interhemispheric fissure and Sylvian fissure (C), and spinal cord (D). The major finding of this report
is that the automated software of eZIS for analyzing brain SPECT is very useful for enhancing the diagnosis of hypoperfusion abnormalities
located at an uncommon region due to a rare disease. Unawareness of the findings of MRI, we ever tested more than 5 experienced nuclear
medicine physicians with the conventional displays of SPECT images, including transaxial, sagittal, and coronal views. Unfortunately, no one
could correctly identify the severe hypoperfusion abnormality at anterior cerebellar lobe. As a statistical parametric analysis program,
eZIS was developed by Matsuda et al in the National Center for Neurology and Psychiatry (NCNP) of Japan. Using the age-classified normal ECD
database as the reference, eZIS has become the most widely used software for analysis of Tc-99m ECD brain SPECT in Japan. After
normalization to the normal brain ECD template and global or cerebellar mean values, this program performs voxel-by-voxel z-score analysis
(z-score = [control mean – individual value]/control standard deviation), and then converted the z-score values into images overlaid on MRI
template. Although eZIS provided a reference normal database of ECD SPECT images with high quality and large numbers of healthy volunteers,
other institutes may be able to use this normal limit properly because of the variations in image characteristics secondary to different
equipment and physical correction algorithms. For correcting the image differences between centers, eZIS allowed the users to convert the
images according the 3-dimensional conversion map by dividing the brain phantom images acquired on users’ scanner and NCNP. SS is a rare
disease resulting from hemosiderin depositions along the leptomeninges of brain and spinal cord but no history of symptomatic subarachnoid
hemorrhage. The major clinical presentations of SS are progressive cerebellar dysfunction (gait ataxia) and bilateral sensorineural hearing
loss. The pathological process is believed due to chronic occult subarachnoid bleeding; however, the source of bleeding usually cannot be
identified. The assessment and diagnosis of SS could be made by MRI, characterized by the findings of hypointensity signals due to
hemosiderin depositions on the pial and epdendymal surfaces, especially the locations of brain stem and cerebellum. In addition to the
anatomy-oriented imaging modality of MRI, the findings of SS on functional imaging, such as positron emission tomography (PET) and SPECT,
had ever been rarely reported. In 1994, the investigators in Japan used I-123 IMP (Nihon Medi-Physics, Tokyo, Japan) brain SPECT to evaluate
a case of idiopathic SS and found hypoperfusion in the cerebellum and frontal lobe where hemosiderin was heavily deposited. This was so far
the only case that the findings of SS on brain perfusion SPECT were reported in the medical literatures. Regarding the findings of SS on
PET, Yamazaki et al first reported 2 cases of SS in 1995 and found both cases had reduced cerebral blood flow and cerebral oxygen metabolism
in the basal temporal lobes. Also in Japan, the investigators reported a case of SS about the results of long-term imaging follow-up with
CT, MRI, and PET. They found that the progressive reduction of cerebral blood flow and oxygen metabolism in the brain stem, cerebellar
hemispheres, and temporal lobes were noted in the regions with marked depositions of hemosiderin on MRI. Using eZIS for analyzing brain
perfusion SPECT, the observed cerebellar hypoperfusion had also been found helpful for enhancing the diagnosis of other conditions in
addition to SS. Waragai et al found a specific hypoperfusion pattern on eZIS analysis of SPECT in the cerebellum and pons in patients with
multiple system atrophy and in the cerebellum in cortical cerebellar atrophy (CCA). The study of Watanabe et al showed that cerebellar
perfusion was decreased in patients with CCA and olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA), but eZIS analysis further demonstrated that
hypoperfusion at the brain stem and cerebellar nucleus in OPCA group was more significant than in CCA group. For studying the correlation of
neuropsychology test performance and SPECT perfusion, Baker et al found that cerebral small vessel disease also might be able to cause
hypoperfusion in cerebellar region shown on eZIS analysis. In the case report of Nanri et al, SPECT-eZIS was found useful for detecting
cerebellar hypoperfusion in a patient with antigliadin-antibody-positive cerebellar ataxia. In conclusion, the presented case demonstrates
the unique value of eZIS analysis of Tc-99m ECD brain SPECT on identifying the severe hypoperfusion in anterior cerebellar lobe and the
trivial hypoperfusion in superficial regions of cerebral cortices in a rare case of SS. As an objectively software-assisted tool for ECD
images, more clinical experiences are still needed to confirm the incremental value of eZIS in enhancing the diagnosis of neurological
diseases. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography, eZIS = easy z-score imaging system, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PET = positron
emission tomography, SPECT = single photon computed tomography, SS = superficial siderosis. C-YW and IS have contributed equally to the
article. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
