Correspondence to Dr.　Hisashi Ito, hisashi.ito@tokushukai.jp Respiratory insufficiency is a critical problem in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) patients. We herein present the case of an autopsied patient with sporadic ALS who underwent diaphragm pacing (DP). The
pathology showed several localized adhesions with a markedly atrophied diaphragm. A marked loss of motor neurons with Bunina bodies and
phosphorylated TDP-43 positive inclusions was found in the spinal cord and primary motor cortex. Mild hyalinization and a few multinucleated
giant cells were present around the electrode tracks in the diaphragm. However, no infiltration of inflammatory cells was detected. Our
findings suggest that full-time DP might not cause severe damage to adjacent diaphragm tissue. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a
slowly progressive neurodegenerative disorder with no known curative treatments. Respiratory insufficiency is a critical problem, and
earlier administration of non-invasive ventilation (NIV) prolongs the survival of ALS patients (1). Diaphragm pacing (DP), which was
initially developed for patients with spinal cord injury (2), was considered to be useful and safe as NIV for ALS patients (3). Pre-clinical
studies suggested an acceptable tissue response with full-time stimulation that would present a minimal risk to patients (4). We herein
present a 63-year-old Japanese autopsy-proven ALS patient who underwent electrical DP. The patient, who had no remarkable past or family
history, was a 60-year-old man. He noticed mild weakness in his left arm followed by a weakness in his right arm and atrophy of the right
hypothenar muscle. At 62 years of age, he developed left leg weakness and was diagnosed with definite ALS according to the World Federation
of Neurology El Escorial criteria. The patient presented neither behavioral nor cognitive impairment. We administered riluzole and implanted
the NeuRx RA/4 Diaphragm Pacing SystemⓇ (NeuRx, Synapse Biomedical, Oberlin, OH, USA) laparoscopically under general anesthesia according to
previous reports (5,6). Namely, the diaphragm was exposed, the phrenic nerve motor point was mapped, pacing electrodes were implanted, and
finally the wires were routed to the external pulse generator. Two pacing electrodes were placed on the motor points of the diaphragm on
each side and intraperitoneal electrodes had sufficient length to prevent them from being accidentally removed. Spontaneous breathing and
diaphragm contraction with pacing were independent because NeuRx does not trigger spontaneous breathing. The implantation of NeuRx was
approved by the Review Board of Tokushukai Medical Alliance, and the patient provided written informed consent in accordance with the
Declaration of Helsinki before implantation. DP was continued for 24 hours a day and did not show any complications. We did not observe
dyssynchrony between spontaneous breathing and diaphragm contraction with pacing. The patient did not desire other NIV or feeding through
gastrostomy throughout the course. Despite DP, he died at 63 years of age, 43 months from the onset and 338 days (11.1 months) after DP
implantation, due to respiratory failure. Stimulation parameters were set at: frequency, 12 Hz; pulse width, 150 μsec; and intensity, 17 mA
(Fig. 1). The clinical course. The patient’s respiratory function deteriorated with CO2 accumulation despite DP (MIP: maximal inspiratory
pressure). The prefixed brain weighed 1,510 g, while the spine weighed 55 g without any apparent abnormal appearance except for moderate
atherosclerotic changes in the basilar artery. There were no marked abnormalities in the trachea or lungs, however, the diaphragm showed
severe atrophy. Several adhesions between the DP electrodes and diaphragm were observed adjacent to the tip of the DP electrodes (Fig. 2A).
A microscopic examination revealed a marked loss of motor neurons in the anterior horn, particularly in the upper cervical cord, and primary
motor cortex with glial proliferation. Bunina bodies were observed in the lumbar cord. Cytoplasmic inclusions of phosphorylated TAR DNA-
binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) were observed in the primary motor cortex, medulla oblongata, cervical cord, and lumbar cord. Mild
hyalinization and a few multinucleated giant cells were present around the electrode tracks in the diaphragm. However, the infiltration of
mononuclear cells around the tracks was not observed (Fig. 2B). Pathology of the diaphragm. A: Severely atrophied diaphragm with 2 DP
electrodes on each side. Several localized adhesions of electrodes are indicated (arrows; bar=10 mm), B: Hematoxylin and Eosin staining of
the diaphragm (magnification 100×). Mild hyalinization was observed around the DP electrode track (T). A multinucleated giant cell was
detected (arrow), however, the infiltration of mononuclear cells around the track was not observed. According to the results of a
multicenter study (7), the US Food and Drug Administration approved NeuRx for humanitarian device exemption in 2011 (8). The pilot study in
the US concluded that DP with NeuRx for ALS patients did not show any safety issues and positively influenced the movement of the diaphragm
and the survival (3). Contrary to previous reports in the US (3,7), a randomized, -controlled trial in the UK concluded that the combination
of NIV and DP with NeuRx was less effective than NIV alone for the survival (9). The period from DP to death of our patient was longer than
the DP alone group in the UK study and similar with that of the NIV plus DP group (Table). However, as our patient did not use other NIV,
the concomitant use of NIV, such as BiPaP, could prevent CO2 accumulation to extend the period from DP to death. On the other hand, the
heterogeneity of clinical features and course of ALS might influence the different results observed in these clinical trials. The strong
need for new international guidelines for clinical trials of ALS was recently proposed (10). The Comparison between the Results of Previous
Trials and the Course of Our Patient. A post-mortem pathological study in ALS patients with NeuRx has not yet been reported. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first autopsied case of an ALS patient who underwent DP with NeuRx. Our pathological findings suggested that DP
with NeuRx might have no safety issues regarding the adjacent diaphragm tissue. As adhesions in the diaphragm were limited, they would not
likely cause significant respiratory failure. However, we might have to use absorbable adhesion barriers to reduce the incidence and
severity of postoperative adhesions because they could restrict the movement of the diaphragm (11). The clinical efficacy of DP with NeuRx
for ALS patients has not yet been elucidated. Further pathological evaluations in more patients are warranted to verify the safety and
efficacy of DP with NeuRx for ALS patients. We gratefully thank Dr. Terunori Sano and Dr. Yuko Saito (Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, National Center Hospital, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Japan) for assistance with the immunohistochemical study.
