Supplemental Digital Content is available in the text Wilson's disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder of copper
metabolism with excellent prognosis if treated timely. However, WD is usually prone to neglect and misdiagnosis at an early stage. We
reported a rare WD pedigree, and the clinical features, laboratory tests, and gene mutations were analyzed in detail. The patient was a
17-year-old and 136-cm-tall girl who presented with limb weakness, combined with multi-organ disorders including blind eye, epilepsy, and
hypopituitarism. Clinical tests showed a low serum ceruloplasmin level, high urinary copper excretion and Kayser-Fleischer (K-F) rings. She
carried a compound heterozygous mutations in ATP7B gene (c.2828G>A and c.3884C>T). Her younger brother, as an asymptomatic patient,
manifested with elevation of transaminases but without neurological and hepatic symptoms. They were diagnosed as WD finally. They were
treated with sodium dimercaptosulphonate, supplemented with zinc gluconate, vitamin B6, vitamin C, as well as restriction of dietary copper.
The urinary copper excretion and serum transaminase level decreased gradually. The abnormal signals in brainstem and basal ganglia were also
remarkably decreased after 4-year of de-copper treatment. As to the patients with complicated clinical manifestations, the extrapyramidal
symptom and basal ganglia signals should be concerned. The serum ceruloplasmin detection and ATP7B gene mutation screening are necessary.
Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder of copper metabolism with a prevalence of 1 in 30,000 and a carrier
frequency of 1 in 150 to 180. The disease-causing gene, ATPase copper transporting beta (ATP7B), maps to 13q14.3 and encodes a transmembrane
protein ATPase (ATP7B). Clinically, majority of WD patients are young adults characterized by extrapyramidal symptoms, hepatic cirrhosis,
Kayser–Fleischer (K–F) rings, low serum ceruloplasmin level (<50 mg/L), and high 24-hour urinary copper excretion (>100 μg/L). As an
inherited neurological disease, encouragingly, WD has an excellent prognosis if the patients could be diagnosed at early stage and treated
timely. However, to those patients who are atypical clinically and accompanied with complex medical history simultaneously, WD is usually
easy to be neglected and misdiagnosed. Here, we report an early and atypical WD pedigree. The proband was a 17-year-old and 136-cm tall
female patient, who was transferred to our hospital complaining of progressive weakness in left limbs over 3 months. First, weakness was
noted in left side lower limb giving rise to difficulty in stepping forward. Without seeking any medical treatment, this manifestation
progressed gradually to disability in walking, complicated with mild dysarthria, without disturbance of consciousness, muscular
fasciculation, myodynia and muscular atrophy, without nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, distension, and jaundice. Besides, she had a complex
medical history. Aged 2 months, her left eye became completely blind due to an ocular infection. At the age of 2 years, she suffered from
recurrent unconsciousness and convulsion of limbs. Her parent described that she showed a cry first and then presented with loss of
consciousness, foaming at the mouth, tonic contractions of limbs, and urinary incontinence sometimes. These symptoms occurred suddenly and
lasted about 1 to 2 minutes. The frequency was about 1 to 2 times/mo at first and it reduced gradually after antiepilepsy treatment
(valproate and phenobarbital) and no seizures occurred after 7 years old. In our department, the electroencephalogram test was performed,
and only mild abnormal α waves were observed on occipital region, while no remarkable sharp waves or spike waves were detected (Supplemental
figure 1). At the age of 10 years, she developed a slow stature growth, and further investigation indicated that she suffered from empty
sella syndrome. Since youth, she also showed an ill tolerance of sports. The significant physical examination included mild dysarthria,
slight intelligent decline (mini–mental state examination : 28 scores; Montreal Cognitive Assessment : 25 scores), developmental delay,
short stature, rudimentary breast, and genitals. The neurological examination showed muscle hypertonia in left limbs, and muscle power was
decreased (grade 4). Brain magnetic resonance images (MRIs) showed mild cerebral atrophy, significant atrophy in left side of eye (Fig. 1A)
and an empty sella (Fig. 1B). Further investigation revealed low level of serum hormones, including growth hormone (0.9158 mg/mL),
adrenocorticotropic hormone (08:00, 1.57 pg/mL and 16:00, 1.33 pg/mL), cortisol (08:00, 0.111 μg/dL and 16:00, 1.33 μg/dL), follicle-
stimulating hormone (1.07 mIU/mL), luteinizing hormone (0.000 mIU/mL), estrogen (24.78 pg/mL), progesterone (0.19 ng/mL), testosterone
(27.36 mg/dL), and prolactin (19.52 ng/mL). She had only 8 years of bone age. Comparison of brain magnetic resonance image of the proband
before (A–C) and after (D–I) decopper treatment. (A) The left side of eye showed significant atrophy. The abnormal signals in brain stem
were scanned. (B) The empty sella was observed. (C) The abnormal signals in basal ganglia were observed on T2-weighted image. (D) and
(F)–(I) The abnormal signals on brain stem and basal ganglia were decreased significantly after decopper treatment. (D) and (F) T2-weighted
image, (G) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequence, (H) susceptibility weighted image, and (I) apparent diffusion coefficient image.
(E) The empty sella was not changed remarkably after decopper treatment 4 years later. Arrows indicate the lesions. Based on ill tolerance
of sports, developmental delay, short stature, and progressive limb weakness, she got a tentative diagnosis of mitochondrial
encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS), which is a common genetic disorder with ischemic stroke among the
young individuals, and 80% of the affected carry A3243G mutation in mitochondrial deoxyribose nucleic acid (mtDNA). After treating with
vitamin B, coenzyme-10, and hydrocortisone, improvement in limb weakness was present but fluctuant. Besides, her serum lactic acid was
normal (resting lactic acid, 1.6 mmol/L; Glucose-loading lactic acid, 2.3 mmol/L). After admitting to our department, a fast screening of
A3243G mutation was performed, the result was negative (data not shown). Electromyography (EMG) tests were also performed including motor
nerve conduction, sensory nerve conduction, needle EMG, F waves, and H reflex, which showed that no neurogenic or myogenic damages were
detected. Taken together, the evidence for MELAS was not sufficient. To further seek the underlying reason for this patient, we recalled her
medical records and abnormal signals in brainstem (Fig. 1A), and basal ganglia were noted (Fig. 1C). Besides, ocular examination revealed
K–F rings on her right cornea (Fig. 2A), which promoted us to seek more evidence for WD. The copper metabolism investigation revealed an
extremely low ceruloplasmin level (21.80 mg/L; NR, 200–600 mg/L), a low concentration of serum copper (5.94 μmol/L; NR, 12.7–30.2 μmol/L),
and a high 24-hour urinary copper excretion (193.04 μg/d; NR, 0–125 μg/d). Abdominal ultrasound test was normal, without any evidence of
cirrhosis and hepatosplenomegaly. We further screened the mutation in ATP7B gene by Sanger sequencing and found a compound heterozygous
mutations (c.2828G > A and c.3884C > T ) (Fig. 3A). Kayser–Fleischer (K–F) rings were found on the cornea of the proband and her younger
brother. (A) The proband, (B) her younger brother, (C) her father, and (D) her mother. Arrows indicate the K–F rings. The mutation analysis
of this Wilson disease pedigree. The c.2828G > A and c.3884C > T mutations were detected in ATP7B gene by Sanger sequencing. (A) The
proband, (B) her younger brother, (C) her father, and (D) her mother. After the confirmed diagnosis of WD, her parents were worried about
their 12-year-old son, who was normal in development, without muscle weakness, atrophy, and myalgia. K–F rings were also observed (Fig. 2B).
The laboratory tests revealed elevation of transaminases, with alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 139 U/L (NR, 5–50 U/L) and aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) 98 U/L (NR, 8–40 U/L), as well as a decreased ceruloplasmin (39.7 mg/L). No significant images were found on
abdominal ultrasound and brain MRI. He also carried the same missense mutations in ATP7B gene (Fig. 3B). Their parents were normal without
any symptoms at their 40s. Their liver function and ceruloplasmin level were normal (ALT 22 U/L, AST 22 U/L, and ceruloplasmin 275 mg/L for
the father; ALT 19 U/L, AST 22 U/L, and ceruloplasmin 307 mg/L for the mother). No K–F rings were observed (Fig. 2C and D). Further genetic
testing showed that the c.2828G > A (p.G943D) mutation was transmitted from the father and the c.3884C > T (p.A1295V) mutation was
transmitted from the mother (Fig. 3C and D). To this early stage of WD pedigree, the timely treatment is critical. With informed consent,
the patient began to accept decoppering treatment with sodium dimercaptosulphonate 187.5 mg (5 mg/kg) daily for 5 days as a course and 8
courses in total, supplemented with zinc gluconate, vitamin B6, vitamin C, as well as restriction of dietary copper. In the following years,
dimercaptosulphonate was substituted by dimercaptosuccinic acid (0.25 mg, bid) and zinc gluconate. Her dysarthria and limb weakness improved
gradually, and she could talk fluently and walk unaided. The muscle tension and power were normal (grade 5). She still showed development
delay; she is 136 cm tall at the age of 21 years. MMSE (28 scores) and MoCA (25 scores) tests were not changed significantly. Her urinary
copper excretion per 24 hours has been reducing to a stable low level gradually; but the serum ceruloplasmin still maintains at a low level
(Fig. 4A and B). The serum hormone testing showed that the gonadal hormones still sustain in a low level, and growth and adrenocorticotropic
hormones were normal (growth hormone [1.17 mg/mL], adrenocorticotropic hormone [08:00, 21.33 pg/mL], cortisol [08:00, 16.64 nmol/L],
follicle-stimulating hormone [0.430 mIU/mL], luteinizing hormone [0.150 mIU/mL], estrogen [<18.35 pmol/L], progesterone [<0.095 nmol/L], and
testosterone [<0.087 nmol/L]). The empty sella was not changed significantly on MRI images (Fig. 1E). However, the abnormal signals in
brainstem and basal ganglia were remarkably decreased after 4 years of decopper treatment (Fig. 1D and F–I). To her younger brother, as an
asymptomatic individual, restriction of dietary copper was advised, as well as supplement with zinc gluconate. His serum transaminase levels
have also been reducing gradually, while the serum ceruloplasmin did not change significantly either (Fig. 4C and D). The following up
clinical profiles of this Wilson disease pedigree. The urinary copper excretion (A) and serum ceruloplasmin level (B) for the proband. The
serum transaminases (C) and ceruloplasmin level (D) for her younger brother. As a copper metabolism disorder, pathological accumulation of
copper in the liver, brain, and cornea ultimately leads to liver disease, neurologic symptoms, and ophthalmological involvement. However,
clinical presentation of WD can be variable, ranging from pure liver disease to conditions that limited to the central nervous system.
Usually, patients with hepatic dysfunction as their initial symptoms tend to show an earlier onset of symptoms than those with a neurologic
presentation. Extrapyramidal manifestations, including chorea, tremor, and dystonia, are the most common neurological presentations. In this
pedigree, the patient presented with atypical neurological symptoms of limb weakness and mild dysarthria, which may lead to a misdiagnosis
of stroke. WD cases with stroke-like presentation were also reported before. In addition, this case of WD also combined with epilepsy and
hypopituitarism. Presentation of epilepsy in patients of WD has been reported, and the prevalence of epilepsy in WD was 10 times higher than
that in general population. It is more likely that copper deposition in the brain is responsible for most of the epilepsies. However, the
hypopituitarism of this case seemed not be associated with WD, because the serum hormones and empty sella on brain MRI were not changed
significantly after effective decopper treatment 4 years later. In this report, the patient's younger brother mainly presented with isolated
elevation of aminotransferases and no clinical symptoms. According to previous study, asymptomatic elevation of aminotransferases was a
common onset of manifestations in pediatric patients, which may largely delay WD diagnosis. Fortunately, genetic testing in our lab
confirmed the diagnosis of WD for this asymptomatic patient. Although previous study concluded that isolated elevation of serum
aminotransferases indicated a benign condition, follow-up is still needed when detected incidentally in children. In addition, a measurement
of serum ceruloplasmin and urine copper may have diagnostic value for the screening of WD in these children. Besides, for these patients,
early diagnosis and timely intervention are most essential to prevent permanent damage to the liver and progression in the brain. In the
aspect of treatment, fortunately, WD is a condition that can be effectively treated, and those adequately treated usually have a normal life
span. Penicillamine, dimercaprol, zinc acetate, and other treatments have been used successfully as decoppering therapy or as preventative
therapy in presymptomatic patients. In this WD pedigree, both of the patient and her younger brother showed well response to decopper
treatment, with decreased urinary copper excretion and serum transaminase level in the follow-up period, and the serum ceruloplasmin
maintained in a stable level. Besides, the abnormal signals in brainstem and basal ganglia were also remarkably decreased, which was
presumed to be associated with the excretion of cranial copper. Interestingly, the concurrence of limb weakness, intolerance of sports,
developmental delay, and short stature made it confused with MELAS initially; however, the negative result of mtDNA A3243G mutation,
combined with the normal serum lactic acid level and no myogenic damages on EMG test, argued against this primary diagnosis. Under such
circumstances, the molecular testing of mtDNA and ATP7B gene mutation seems to be necessary and important. To date, more than 600 distinct
disease-causing mutations have been reported in ATP7B gene (http://www.hgmd.org/), and the majority of WD patients are compound
heterozygotes. According to Dong et al research, the c.2828G > A (p.G943D) mutation was one of the common disease-causing variants in
Chinese WD patients. If possible, direct sequencing of the whole ATP7B gene is advised, and the high-throughput next-generation sequencing
is also a reliable and time-saving method for diagnosing WD. In conclusion, we reported an early and special WD pedigree with c.2828G > A
and c.3884C > T mutations in ATP7B gene, and we hope that it will facilitate the understanding, diagnosis and treatment of WD to
neurologist, ophthalmologist, and endocrinologist. For atypical pediatric patients, especially with asymptomatic elevations of
aminotransferases, the routine serum ceruloplasmin detection is necessary, which will help to diagnose WD at early stage and treat at
presymptomatic stage. The authors sincerely thank the patients and their parents for their participation. Abbreviations: ALT = alanine
aminotransferase, AST = aspartate aminotransferase, ATP7B = ATPase copper transporting beta, EMG = electromyography, K–F rings =
Kayser–Fleischer rings, MELAS = mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes, MMSE = mini–mental state
examination, MoCA = Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, WD = Wilson disease. Q-JZ and L-QX have contributed
equally to the article. Informed consent: Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study. This study
was approved by the Ethics Committee of First Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical University. Funding/support: This work was supported by
the grant 81322017, 81371261, and U1505222 from the National Natural Science Foundation of China, grant NCET-13-0736 from Program for New
Century Excellent Talents in University, National Key Clinical Specialty Discipline Construction Program and Key Clinical Specialty
Discipline Construction Program of Fujian. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Supplemental Digital Content is available
for this article.
