Retrograde drilling is a well accepted procedure for osteochondral lesion of the talus and subchondral cyst with intact overlying cartilage.
It has good results in most reports. Compared to anterograde drilling, retrograde drilling can protect the integrity of the articular
cartilage. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the suitability of using retrograde drilling for osteochondral lesion with subchondral
cyst and discuss the mechanism involved in the development of subchondral cyst. We report a 53-year-old man who had complained left ankle
pain that lasted over 6 months which was exacerbated by walking. We diagnosed it as osteochondral lesion of the talus with subchondral cyst.
Plain X-ray, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the ankle. He undertook retrograde drilling without debridement of
cartilage. After the surgery, the pain had been subsided for 1 year, although arthritic change had progressed. However, after 5 years of
retrograde drilling, he revisited our hospital due to severe ankle pain. Plain X-ray and MRI showed arthritic change of the ankle and
multiple cystic formation of talus. Retrograde drilling has some problem because this procedure is not theoretically correct when the
development of a subchondral cyst in osteochondral lesion of the talus is considered. In addition, retrograde drilling may impair uninjured
bone marrow of the talus, resulting in the development of multiple cystic formations. Osteochondral lesion of the talus (OLT) is an injury
or abnormality of the talar articular cartilage and adjacent bone. The incidence of OLT has been reported to be ranging from 0.09% of all
talar fractures to 6.5% of ankle sprains. Patients typically present with chronic ankle pain along with intermittent swelling, stiffness,
instability, and giving way. Treatment for OLT depends on the size and location of the lesion as well as the activity level of the patient.
There is a wide variety of treatment strategies for osteochondral defects of the ankle. Standard management protocol is usually accepted as
follows: nonoperative management is typically used for acute and nondisplaced lesion, while operative treatment is used for chronic and
displaced lesions. Generally, for small-sized lesions (<1.5 cm2), marrow-inducing reparative techniques such as antegrade drilling
(transmalleolar drilling) or retrograde drilling (transtalar drilling) might be ideal treatment. For large-sized lesions (>1.5 cm2),
restorative techniques such as osteochondral autologous transfer system and autologous chondrocyte implantation are ideal treatment methods.
Retrograde drilling is used for primary OLT and subchondral cyst with intact overlying cartilage. It is also indicated when the defect is
difficult to reach through usual arthroscopic portals. Most surgeons have reported that the use of retrograde percutaneous drilling has good
results in 81% to 100% of patients. We present a patient with advanced arthritic change and multiple cyst formation of talus after
retrograde drilling for OLT with subchondral cyst. The purpose of this study was to evaluate if the retrograde drilling was an appropriate
treatment for OLT with subchondral cyst by looking at the mechanism involved in the development of the subchondral cyst. The patient signed
informed consent for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images. Ethical approval of this study was waived by the
ethics committee of Chonbuk National University Hospital because it was a case report. A 53-year-old man (height of 172 cm, weight of 70 kg,
body mass index of 23.6, office clerk) presented to our outpatient clinic with left ankle pain due to hyperextension of that ankle about 6
months ago. The pain was exacerbated by walking but improved by resting. He had not been treated for ankle pain in other hospitals. He did
not have any specific history or family history with ankle pain. The symptom repeatedly got better and worse. It then got worse. On
examination, there were mild swelling and direct tenderness over the anterior aspect of ankle without any locking or impingement with foot
movement. He had full range of motions. There was no positive sign of other examinations such as varus or valgus instability of the left
ankle. Plain anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of the left ankle showed a radiolucent lesion at the central portion of the talus.
In computed tomography (CT), there was a subchondral cystic lesion (7 × 7 × 10 mm sized) on the central portion of the talus and multiple
small subchondral cystic lesions on the medial side of the talus. T2-weighted coronal and sagittal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed
bone marrow edema on talus and subchondral cysts with high-signal intensity (Fig. 1A and B). The overlying cartilage on the osteochondral
lesion was relatively intact. Based on CT and MRI, we diagnosed it as OLT with subchondral cyst and degenerative arthritis (Anderson stage
2A). Laboratory data showed normal values of white blood cell (WBC), neutrophil, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive
protein (CRP) levels (8700/μL, 5200/μL, and 9 and 0.2 mg/dL, respectively). T2-weighted coronal (A) and sagittal (B) magnetic resonance
images demonstrating bone marrow edema on talar body and osteochondral lesion with subchondral cyst. Retrograde drilling was performed using
K-wires under C-arm image intensifier. (C) Arthroscopic finding showing synovitis surrounding subchondral cyst and relatively intact and
stable talar cartilage (D—medial side, E—lateral side, F—central portion). In spite of conservative treatment (short leg splint, medication
for pain relief) with medication for about 3 months, symptoms persisted. Therefore, we decided to perform arthroscopic surgery. In
arthroscopic findings, there was synovitis surrounding the subchondral cyst in ankle joint (Fig. 1D–F). However, the cartilage on the
osteochondral lesion was relatively intact with mild delamination (Fig. 1D–F). We performed arthroscopic synovectomy for nonspecific
inflammatory synovium (meniscoid-like lesion). We performed retrograde drilling using K-wires (0.062 inch) for OLT without penetrating the
subchondral bone with C-arm image intensifier (Fig. 1C). Pathologist reported the biopsy results of the synovium. It showed hyalinized
connective tissue consistent with meniscoid-like lesion. During 1 year of follow-up, AP radiographs of the left ankle revealed that the
depression of the cartilage was gradually increased. However, he no longer complained ankle pain. He stopped visiting the outpatient
department in our hospital. However, he revisited our outpatient clinic at 5 years after the surgery. At the time, he complained left ankle
pain (9 point of visual analog scale ) that started about 4 months ago. It was more severe than the first symptom. He complained that it was
difficult to walk because of the severe pain of the left ankle. AP and lateral radiographs revealed subchondral sclerosis and osteophyte
formation of the left ankle. T2-weighted sagittal and coronal MRI showed multiple cystic lesions, bone marrow edema in talus, and thin talar
articular cartilage (Fig. 2A–C). T2-weighted coronal (A, B) and sagittal (C) magnetic resonance images showing multiple cystic lesions, bone
marrow edema on subchondral, and body of the talus with thin talar articular cartilage. Arthroscopic finding showing fibrillated articular
cartilage in whole talar dome, indicating degenerative change of the ankle (D, E). Laboratory data showed normal values of WBC, neutrophil,
and ESR (7400/μL, 4700/μL, and 10, respectively). His CRP was slightly elevated to 0.5 mg/dL (normal value ≤0.3 mg/dL). We performed
additional laboratory tests to evaluate rheumatoid arthritis. However, rheumatoid factor and anticyclic citrullinated peptide antibody
(anti-CCP Ab) were within normal range (RF = 6.62 IU/mL, anti-CCP Ab = 2.2 U/mL). On joint fluid analysis, WBC count was 350/mm3. There were
about 25% polymorphonuclear leukocytes. The amount of glucose was almost the same as serum glucose level. The appearance of joint fluid was
relatively clear with yellow color similar to that of normal joint fluid. Joint fluid was culture negative for any bacteria. In arthroscopic
findings, there were loose bodies and extensive degenerative change of the articular cartilage of the tibia and talus (Fig. 2D and E). We
performed arthroscopic synovectomy and chondroplasty to remove the loose bodies. At 1 year after the surgery, pain of the ankle was reduced
to 3 point in VAS. However, degenerative change of the left ankle gradually got worse in radiographs. To date, retrograde drilling is a
well-accepted procedure for osteochondral lesion of talus with subchondral cyst and intact cartilage covering. Compared with anterograde
drilling, its advantage is that it can protect the integrity of the articular cartilage. The OLT with subchondral cyst in this case was an
accurate indication of retrograde drilling because articular cartilage was relatively intact in primary surgery. However, multiple cystic
formation and the osteoarthritis of the talus developed after the primary surgery. The mechanism involved in the development of subchondral
cyst is discussed below. Currently, there are 2 theories (mechanism and mucoid degeneration) involved in the development of subchondral cyst
with OLT. According to valve mechanism, subchondral cyst is caused by damaged cartilage functioning as a valve. It may allow intrusion of
joint fluid from the joint space into the subchondral bone, but not in the opposite direction. For this reason, Lui has suggested that
debridement for articular cartilage of the osteochondral lesion should be a component of surgical treatment to remove the valve. Another
theory is mucoid degeneration of intramedullary connective tissue probable preceded by focal ischemia or aseptic necrosis. According to
these theories, if the damaged cartilage is not debrided (retrograde drilling only), the subchondral cyst might recur because the damaged
cartilage still can work as a valve. In addition, retrograde drilling can impair uninjured bone marrow of the talus through drilling tract.
Therefore, the cystic formation might be caused by mucoid degeneration due to the development of focal ischemia along the drilling tracts.
Moreover, it is difficult to target the lesion using fluoroscopic 2D imaging. If accurate targeting to the cystic lesion is not
accomplished, multiple intramedullary cysts might be caused by mucoid degeneration. Considering these theories, we need to keep in mind that
retrograde drilling does not always induce a good result. It can show a contrary result (multiple cystic formation) like in this case. The
most common sites of OLT are medial and lateral talar dome. However, in this case, the lesion was placed on the central area, indicating
that there might be other causes of the osteochondral lesions such as rheumatoid arthritis. However, laboratory test and pathologic report
showed general findings of degenerative arthritis and meniscoid-like lesion. This article has some limitations. This is just 1 case report.
Therefore, we cannot conclude that retrograde drilling is unsuitable for OLT by this case alone. However, we need to reconsider if
retrograde drilling is indicated for osteochondral lesion of talus with cyst because of the mechanism of cyst formation and additional
injury of normal talus caused by drilling. In conclusion, retrograde drilling has some problem because this procedure is not theoretically
correct considering the development of a subchondral cyst in OLT. In addition, retrograde drilling may impair uninjured bone marrow of the
talus, resulting in the development of multiple cystic formations. Abbreviations: Anti-CCP ab = anticyclic citrullinated peptide antibody,
CRP = C-reactive protein, CT = computed tomography, ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, OLT =
osteochondral lesion of the talus, RF = rheumatoid factor, WBC = white blood cell. S-YJ and J-KK are equally contributed to this work. This
study was supported by a grant (CNUH-BRI-2012-02-005) of the Biomedical Research Institute of Chonbuk National University Hospital (CNUH-
BRI), Republic of Korea. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
