Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is an aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma. It mostly invades lymph nodes with extranodal involvement
observed in the soft tissue, bone, and skin. We report a 34-year-old Chinese male patient who presented with headache, diplopia, and vomit.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis via lumbar puncture showed elevated CSF pressure, elevated CSF protein concentrations, decreased CSF
glucose and chloride concentration significantly, and pleocytosis of 68 to 350 × 106/L, in which lymphocytes and monocytes were predominant.
These changes could be suggestive of tuberculous (TB) meningitis. Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of spinal cord delineated multiple
enhancing nodules in spinal cord, cauda equina, and cristae membrane, and multiple abnormal enhancing lesions in bilateral lumbar
intervertebral foramen. Spinal dura mater biopsy and paraffin pathology examination revealed anaplastic lymphoma kinase positive ALCL. High-
dose methotrexate, cytosine arabinoside craniospinal, and radiotherapy. Last follow-up on September 22, 2015 showed no evidence of tumor
recurrence and the lower extremity muscle strength recovered to 4/5. ALCL of primary central nervous system is an exceedingly rare tumor,
which is usually misdiagnosed as meningitis (especially TB meningitis) according to clinical manifestation and laboratory examination. Thus
closely monitoring patient's conditions and timely adjusting therapeutic regimen during treatment are necessary. Anaplastic large cell
lymphoma (ALCL) was described by Stein in 1985 as a group of CD30 (Ki-1) positive pleomorphic large cells. Immune phenotype and gene
rearrangement display ALCLs originating from T-cell or null-cell phenotype, in which the former accounts for 80%, and the latter 20%. About
40% to 60% ALCLs with the t (2; 5) (p23; q35) translocation express the nucleophosmin-anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), a chimeric protein
exerting significant oncogenic potential due to sustained activation of tyrosine kinases. Based on ALK, the immune marker, expressing or
not, ALCLs are divided into ALK-positive and ALK-negative phenotypes. ALK-positive ALCLs are commonly seen in patients at the age below 30,
often involving the lymph nodes and extranodal sites. In addition to skin, bone, and soft tissue, it can also occur in the lung, stomach,
brain, gums, nasopharynx, tonsils, and other rare locations. Compared with ALK-positive ALCLs, ALK-negative ALCLs are commonly present at a
middle-aged and elder groups, with a more unfavorable prognosis. ALCLs involving primary central nervous system (CNS) are extremely rare,
which may occur at all ages, with most patients below 50 years old and predominantly male. The clinical symptoms are various, and the main
manifestations are increased intracranial pressure and headache that are triggered by tumor oppression, nausea, seizures, and movement
disorders. Lesions mainly locate on the tentorium cerebelli, primarily on the parietal lobe, frontal lobe, temporal lobe, and occipital
lobe, often accompanied by violating local pia mater. A 34-year-old male was admitted to hospital on October 31, 2013 because of headache
after catching cold, diplopia, and vomit for one-and-a-half months. Two to three months ago, the patient felt fatigue, with poor state of
mind, then appeared runny nose, sustained headache coupled with paroxysmal deterioration, and mild diplopia after running through the rain a
half months ago. Self-administration of some cold medicines relieved runny nose partially. The patient then received antibiotic
(specifically unknown) treatment in a local hospital, obtaining remission of headache and diplopia in the short term. Thirty-one days ago,
headache and diplopia symptoms were aggravated obviously, the patient appeared projectile vomiting. On a clinical basis, tuberculous (TB)
meningitis was diagnosed in the local hospital, and the patient was given treatment measures such as anti-TB, reducing the intracranial
pressure and oral dexamethasone. Twenty-six days ago, he presented with low-grade fever from noon to night in the next 7 days and the
maximum temperature was 38°C. Seventeen days ago, the doctors stopped using anti-TB medicines on account of discovering suspicious neoplasm
cells in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The patient was in good nutritional and conscious condition, and had been healthy prior to the illness
onset, but lost 6 kg after his illness. Details of relevant past and present medical history and interventions are shown in Table 1 (Fig.
1). Timeline. Timeline. Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of head revealed bilateral cerebral and cerebellar hemispheres abnormal
meningeal enhancement. Physical examination on admission: His vital signs included blood pressure—120/80 mm Hg, heart rate—59 per min,
respiratory rate—18 per min, and body temperature—36.5°C. The patient was in good conscious condition. A neurological examination disclosed
binocular diplopia of peripheral vision. In addition to neck stiffness was suspicious positive, other signs of meningeal irritation, Kerning
sign, and Brudzinski sign were negative. Babinski reflex was negative bilaterally. Direct and consensual light reflex were absent in the
right eye on Day 5 postadmission. The next day, strength was 3/5 in muscles of the right lower extremity followed by progressive weakness
till it performing pathological character. At the same time, a sensory examination showed numbness of both lower extremities. On Day 19
postadmission, the patient presented with paraplegia of both lower extremities, and his sensation was partially absent to the level of the
xiphoid. Lumbar punctures performed during the full-blown episode repeatedly showed an increased protein, low glucose and chloride levels,
and elevated white blood cell (WBC) counts with elevated CSF pressure, but no clear neoplastic lymphoid cells. Likewise, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), magnetic resonance angiography, and positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) examination did not prompt the
central lesions. The outcomes of CSF analysis could be suggestive of TB meningitis; however, CNS tumors could not be excluded. With the
progress of the disease, enhanced MRI examination of spinal cord revealed that multiple enhancing nodules in spinal cord, cauda equina, and
cristae membrane, and multiple abnormal enhancements in bilateral lumbar intervertebral foramen (Fig. 2). The patient underwent a spinal
dura mater biopsy, and paraffin pathology examination which revealed fibrofatty tissue infiltrated by a large number of atypical neoplastic
cells, with irregular ovoid, twisted nuclear, visible small nucleoli, and nuclear division easily being seen (Fig. 3). Immunohistochemical
stains showed immunopositivity for CD30, ALK, tumor cells Vimentin, LCA, TIA1, GranzymeB, and CD56, but negative immunoreactivity for
AE1/AE3, CD20, CD3, CD68 (KP1), CD68 (PGM1), CD4, and CD8 (Fig. 4). In situ hybridization was undertaken, and demonstrated Epstein–Barr
virus was negative. In order to minimize the damage to the patient, no further biopsy of the brain has proceeded. On the seventh postbiopsy
day, PET-CT examination documented (Fig. 5): increased glucose metabolism in the right mesial temporal lobe, considering trigeminal
neuropathy; multiple equal density lesions in spinal, with increased glucose metabolism in different degrees; multiple increased glucose
metabolism lesions in cauda equina; multiple lumbar nerve root and the first sacral nerve of right sides got thickening, with significantly
increased glucose metabolism widened bilateral lateral ventricles and third ventricle. Combined with the dynamic changes of the patient's
symptoms and signs, clinical examination results on hospital, we took meninges as the primary lesion with secondary spinal cord and spinal
dural involvement. The final diagnosis was finally revised as primary CNS ALK-positive ALCL. Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of spinal
cord delineated multiple enhancement nodules in spinal cord, cauda equina, and cristae membrane (arrow). The histologic section of spinal
cord showed fibrofatty tissue infiltrated by a large number of atypical cells (A, HE ×100), with irregular ovoid, twisted nuclei, visible
small nucleoli, and nuclear fission easily to see (B, HE ×400). HE = hematoxylin–eosin. Immunohistochemical stains showed immunopositivity
for ALK (A), CD30 (B), TIA-1 (C), and GranzymeB (D), but negative immunoreactivity for CD20 (E) and CD3 (F). Compared results of twice
positron emission tomography-computed tomography (A–J): (A) left L1–2, (B) left L2–3, (C) left L3–4, (D) right L4–5, (E) left L4–5, (F) left
L5–S1, (G) T3, (H) T4, (I) T5, and (J) T8. In consideration of CSF changes, particularly chloride decreasing significantly, it was inclined
to diagnose this patient as TB meningitis at the onset of the disease. But the effect of diagnosis therapy was not as well as expected. As
the disease progresses, patients had new symptoms, which promoted the correct diagnosis as a valuable clinical guideline. The patient
achieved good prognosis with complete remission following 6 cycles high-dose Methotrexate with Leucovorin rescue, 1 cycle high-dose Cytosine
arabinoside, a simultaneous 6 cycles of intrathecal chemotherapy, and twice craniospinal radiotherapy. Related examinations showed no
evidence of neoplasm recurrence, and the lower extremity muscle strength was recovered to 4/5. The patient was started with anti-TB therapy
(Rifampicin, Pyrazinamide, Ethambutol, and Isoniazid quadruple therapy), and reduced intracranial pressure treatment with Mannitol and 5 mg
Dexamethasone after he hospitalized. On the 5th hospital day, he complained of decreased vision in his right eye. MRI of his brain failed to
show any lesion, suggested it was more likely to diagnosis as TB meningitis. Considering anti-TB drugs could induce retrobulbar neuritis,
Ethambutol and Isoniazid were stopped taking, added Moxifloxacin and increasing the dose of Dexamethasone to 10 mg at the same time. On the
6th hospital day, the patient presented with progressive weakness of the right lower extremity, numbness of both lower extremities, which
could not be explained by TB meningitis. The following MRI of spinal cord revealed that multiple enhancing nodules in spinal cord, cauda
equina, and cristae membrane. On the 12th hospital day, he underwent a spinal dura mater biopsy and was diagnosed as ALK-positive ALCL. On
the 19th hospital day, he was found double-leg paralyzed, sensation partially absent to the level of the xiphoid and was turned over to an
hematologist for active treatment. The patient then achieved the following treatment, 6 cycles of systemic high-dose methotrexate (HD MTX,
10 mg) and 1 cycle of high-dose cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C, 8 g) along with 6 cycles of intrathecal chemotherapy, and twice craniospinal
radiotherapy. The patient had no further discomfort after chemotherapy. The last follow-up on September 22, 2015 showed no evidence of tumor
recurrence and the lower extremity muscle strength recovered to 4/5. ALCLs of primary CNS occur at all ages, and most patients are below 50
years old and predominantly male. The overall survival estimates are notably various from the shortest only 1 month, to longest up to more
than 8 years. The etiology of ALCL of primary CNS is still unknown and exact diagnosis depends on pathological examination and immunological
phenotypes identification. Although the spinal dura mater biopsy prompted us the final diagnosis and the treatment based on ALK-positive
ALCL was effective, our limitation is that future biopsy of the patient's meninx was not performed since this would do a great harm on the
patient himself. In this case, the male presented with intermittent fever, persistent headache, vomiting, and diplopia, with suspicious
positive meningeal irritation and negative results of CSF etiology examination. CSF analysis showed an increased protein level, low glucose
and chloride, high WBC counts with elevated CSF pressure, but no clear neoplastic lymphoid cells, which were in line with the manifestations
of TB meningitis. However, the effect of regular anti-TB therapy unsatisfied, prompting a possible misdiagnosis. CSF biochemical test, such
as protein, sugar, and chloride concentration, provides a pivotal reference in diagnosis and treatment of CNS infection. The ratio of
chloride concentrations between CSF and blood is about 1:2 to maintain normal osmotic balance between blood and CSF. The decreased chloride
concentration in CSF is common in TB and cryptococcal meningitis, but also appears in other diseases such as infection, cancer, autoimmune
diseases, trauma of CNS, and so on. Thus, the change of chloride concentration in CSF has limited diagnostic value in differential diagnosis
of CNS diseases. When considering meningitis or TB meningitis in the light of clinical manifestations and CSF examination, the patient could
undergo diagnostic treatment, and real-time observation to monitor the effect of related therapy. Adjusting therapy timely is important to
misdiagnosis. Brain biopsy can be performed when conditions permit, which would help to avoid misdiagnosis and delayed treatment. The
patient provided written permission for publication of this case report. The authors are grateful to 3 anonymous reviewers and Xiaomeng Wang
for their critical reading of the manuscript and suggestions. Abbreviations: ALCL = anaplastic large cell lymphoma, ALK = anaplastic
lymphoma kinase, Ara-C = arabinoside, CNS = central nervous system, CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, CT = computed tomography, HD MTX = high-dose
methotrexate, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PET-CT = positron emission tomography-computed tomography, TB = tuberculosis. The authors
have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
