A 32-year-old immigrant man presented with new onset jaundice. His past medical history was significant for type 2 diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. His initial laboratory finding and liver biopsy were suggestive of autoimmune hepatitis (AIH). The plan
was to start steroids pending negative results for viral serology, but it came back positive for hepatitis E virus. The patient's liver
function test and clinical condition improved significantly on conservative management over a period of 1 month. Therefore, we suggest
testing for hepatitis E especially in immigrants or recent travelers to endemic areas who presents with clinical features suggestive of AIH.
Acute hepatitis has a broad range of etiologies that consist of viral infection, autoimmune disease, toxic, and metabolic disorders.
Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is the second most common cause of sporadic hepatitis in the Middle East and North Africa with the highest incidence
in Asia, Africa, Middle East, and Central America (1, 2). HEV is an icosahedral, non-enveloped single-stranded RNA virus, that is,
approximately 27–34 nm in diameter. HEV has four genotypes. In developed countries, sporadic cases of HEV genotype 3 have occurred following
consumption of uncooked/undercooked pork or deer meat (2), whereas in developing countries like India and Bangladesh, the burden of HEV
infection is from HEV genotype 1 and 2 (3). Diagnosis of acute hepatitis E is made based on detection of HEV RNA by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and/or anti-HEV IgM. During the resolution phase of the infection, serum is positive for anti-HEV IgG. HEV infection is
usually a self-limiting disease in immunocompetent patients. HEV is associated with acute liver failure (4) and in some cases is thought to
trigger possibly an immune response that can ultimately develop into autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) (5). We present a case of new onset jaundice
and markedly elevated transaminases suggestive of AIH but found to be acute HEV infection. A 32-year-old overweight non-alcoholic non-smoker
Bengali man was admitted to our hospital with jaundice, nausea, non-bilious, non-bloody vomiting, and worsening malaise for 3 days. His past
medical history was significant for type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. He denied any sick contacts, use of herbs,
or recent change in medications. His physical examination was significant for normal vital signs, scleral icterus, and without stigmata for
chronic liver disease. Laboratory values on admission and during the hospital course are shown in Table 1. In our patient, initial workup
revealed alkaline phosphatase (ALP)/aspartate transaminase (AST) with ratio <1.5, more than twofold increase in IgG, antinuclear antibody
(ANA), and anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA) titer >1:80, anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA) positive, negative drug history, and no alcohol
intake. A liver biopsy performed showed lymphoplasmacytic portal inflammation with significant interface hepatitis and cholestasis (Figs. 1
and 2). These clinical findings added up to an International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group (IAIHG) score of 13 points. Because the patient
emigrated from an endemic area for hepatitis E about 1 month prior to presentation, HEV IgM was checked, which subsequently returned
positive. The test was performed by Focus Diagnostics, Inc. based out of San Juan Capistrano, CA, using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
method. The patient was treated with supportive care and closely monitored in an outpatient clinic. He improved clinically with significant
improvement of his liver function tests over the next month. Portal inflammation (vertical arrow) with interphase hepatitis and cholestasis
(horizontal arrow). Portal inflammation containing plasma cell (arrow). Laboratory values IAIHG developed a diagnostic scoring system, which
outlined 13 criteria for the diagnosis of AIH in a majority of the patients. It included gender; ALP to AST or alanine transaminase (ALT)
ratio; serum globulins or IgG levels; ANA, ASMA, or anti-liver-kidney microsome antibodies; AMA; hepatitis viral markers; drug history;
average alcohol intake; liver histology; other autoimmune diseases; seropositivity for other defined autoantibodies; HLA DR3 or DR4; and
response to therapy (6). In our case, the IAIHG score of 13 points meets the criteria for ‘probable AIH’. Concomitantly, he was positive for
anti-HEV IgM and IgG antibodies suggesting acute HEV infection. The pathophysiology of these concomitant presentations of AIH and HEV
seroprevalence is not well understood. Several studies have reported the presence of anti-HEV IgG antibodies in patients with AIH suggesting
that HEV infection may act as a possible trigger or hapten for the development of AIH (5). Similar to our case, AMA is found to be present
in sera of patients with AIH more frequently than expected. However, the clinical significance of it remains unclear (7). Several
observations in our case suggest that HEV may have triggered an AIH response. Resolution of abnormal liver function test and clinical
recovery in a short period of 6–8 weeks without any intervention is unlikely in patient with AIH (8). Liver biopsy showing signs of portal
inflammation and cholestasis is characteristic of viral etiology. Serology tests were positive for HEV. Patient clinically improved and
returned to his home country. Due to that, we were not able to send HEV PCR. HEV PCR is considered to be the most sensitive test for
diagnosing acute HEV infection. However, a recent investigation showed a variable sensitivity for different HEV PCR assays (9). Similar
cases with a concomitant presentation of HEV and autoimmune mimicry have been reported in the literature (10, 11). This case illustrates the
importance of excluding acute HEV in patients with criteria for ‘probable AIH’ from an endemic area. Empiric therapy for AIH may lead to
protracted and unnecessary therapy. Effect of steroids in such cases, beneficial or harmful, is unclear given the paucity of data in the
literature. In conclusion, our case is unique as it shows that in-patients who are clinically stable and improving with conservative
management, treatment with steroids should be delayed until HEV is appropriately ruled out. The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interest regarding the publication of this article.
