Correspondence to Dr.　Kenya Nishioka, kenya.nishioka@gmail.com Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients who develop a paraneoplastic syndrome may
present with neuromuscular disorders. We herein report the case of a 50-year-old man who suffered from progressive gait disturbance and
muscle weakness. The results of a nerve conduction study fulfilled the criteria of chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy. An
abdominal CT scan detected RCC, the pathological diagnosis of which was clear cell type. After tumor resection and a single course of
intravenous immunoglobulin therapy, the patient's symptoms drastically improved over the course of one year. The patient's neurological
symptoms preceded the detection of cancer. A proper diagnosis and the initiation of suitable therapies resulted in a favorable outcome.
Paraneoplastic syndrome develops in approximately 10-40% of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients. Neuromuscular disorders, such as
paraneoplastic syndrome related to RCC are extremely rare (1). We herein report the case of a patient who initially presented with gait
disturbance due to polyneuropathy, which was defined as chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) related to RCC. We discuss
the possible risk factors for demyelinating peripheral neuropathy as a paraneoplastic syndrome. The patient originally came from Bangladesh
and lived in Tokyo. At the age of 50, he noticed general fatigue. Two weeks later, he had difficulty going up and down stairs because of
weakness in his bilateral lower limbs. One month after the onset of symptoms, he was unable to walk long distances without muscle cramps in
the bilateral lower limbs; furthermore, he showed muscle atrophy on both femurs, and lost 7 kg of body weight. After presentation to our
hospital, he was admitted. During the first set of neurological examinations, the symptoms related to the patient's cranial nerves showed
normal findings. He showed a wide-based gait and was unable to perform tandem gait or squat. Muscle weakness was found in the bilateral
lower limbs (manual muscle test (MMT); right: left = 4:4). Muscle atrophy was observed on the proximal side of the lower limbs. The
patient's deep tendon reflexes were diminished at both knees and Achilles tendons. Abnormal sensations such as hypoesthesia and numbness
appeared on the peripheral side of both of the lower limbs. A cytobiochemical examination of the patient's cerebrospinal fluid revealed a
high protein level (150 mg/dL; normal, ≤45 mg/dL), a normal level of glucose (71 mg/dL; normal, ≤75 mg/dL), and a normal cell count (4 /μL;
normal, ≤5 μL). The patient's myelin basic protein level and IgG index value were within the normal range. The cytology of the cerebrospinal
fluid presented no abnormal findings, including malignancy. We also used a Euroimmun scan (Euroline, Euroimmun, Luebeck, Germany) to
evaluate antibodies against amphiphysin, CV2, Ma2/Ta Ri, Yo, Hu, recoverin, SOX1, titin, zic4, GAD65, and Tr related to paraneoplastic
syndrome. All of the levels were normal. A nerve conduction study fulfilled the criteria for CIDP (Table 1) (2). The patient displayed a
prolonged motor distal latency of ≥50% above the upper limit of the normal values in four nerves. Conduction blocks were seen in three
nerves on the right and left sides of the ulnar nerve and at the right side of the peroneal nerve. These were defined as >50% reduction in
the amplitude of the proximal negative peak compound muscle action potential relative to the distal side (2). Lumbar MRI showed high
intensity in the area of the medullary cone to the cauda equina with gadolinium enhancement and the increased thickness of the spinal nerve
roots from T8 to the lower lumbar levels (Figure a, b and c). Abdominal CT scans revealed RCC in the right kidney (63 mm) without direct
invasion to the spinal cord (Figure d). Twenty-two days after admission, the patient underwent laparoscopic surgery to resect the tumor in
the right kidney. The pathological diagnosis was clear cell carcinoma (Figure e). We initiated additional therapy with intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIg) due to the mild weakness of the patient's lower limbs. One month after the administration of IVIg, the patient was
able to move his limbs with full power, squat, and walk for long distances. His MMT fully recovered. After one year of follow-up, he was
healthy with no recurrence of the tumor or polyneuropathy. The patient's nerve conduction study (NCS) results indicated a partial
improvement (Table 1). The Results of the Nerve Conduction Study before and after Treatment. MCV: motor conduction velocity, Amp: amplitude
of the muscle action potential on wrist or ankle stimulation, DL: distal latency, FWL: F wave minimum latency on wrist or ankle stimulation,
R: right, L: left, NA: not assessed (a) and (b) The sagittal and axial views, respectively, of lumbar T1-weighted MRI with gadolinium
enhancement demonstrate longitudinal high intensity on the cauda equina (white arrows). The axial view indicates prominent enhancement on
the anterior side of the cauda equine at L2. (c) The dorsal roots (white arrows) show high intensity in the sagittal view. (d) Abdominal CT
scans with ioversol enhancement reveal an RCC on the right kidney (white triangle). (e) The pathological findings were consistent with clear
cell carcinoma (Hematoxylin and Eosin staining). Our patient had a favorable outcome after tumor resection and single round of IVIg therapy
over the course of one year. Although our case did not have any specific antibodies related to RCC, he was diagnosed with paraneoplastic
neurological syndrome because of the clear improvement after tumor resection. We summarized the findings from five previous reports that
mentioned the association between RCC and polyneuropathy in Table 2 (3-7). The cases shared common clinical features: (i) symptoms of the
lower limbs involving sensory or motor neuropathy, (ii) an NCS result revealing demyelinating polyneuropathy, and (iii) the pathological
appearance of clear cell carcinoma. Half of the patients showed good responses to immunomodulation therapy and tumor resection.
Interestingly, the neurological symptoms preceded the detection of cancer in the majority of patients (5/6) with paraneoplastic neurological
disorders due to RCC. Neurological symptoms may imply the existence of malignancies among patients with paraneoplastic syndrome. A Summary
of the Previous Studies Describing Peripheral Neuropathy Due to Renal Cell Cancer. The marked delay of minimal F wave latencies in multiple
nerves also supported diffuse dysfunction in the root nerves and the cauda equina. Lumbar MRI revealed gadolinium enhancement of the cauda
equina and the dorsal roots in the lower spine. These findings are characteristic of CIDP or Guillain-Barré syndrome (8). This phenomenon
occurred due to the non-specific disturbance of the blood-nerve barrier by a T-cell-mediated process. Paraneoplastic motor neuropathy and
Hodgkin's lymphoma have been reported to cause gadolinium enhancement of the lumbar spine (9). Gadolinium enhancement of the lumbar spine
has not previously been reported among patients with RCC and polyneuropathy (3-7). Although the type of malignancy in this previous case was
different from the findings in our case, lumbosacral gadolinium enhancement may be a common characteristic of paraneoplastic neuropathy. One
of the limitations of the present study is that we could not strictly exclude the possible co-incidence of RCC and demyelinating peripheral
neuropathy, as we could not detect any specific antibodies related to RCC. Although the efficacy of our treatments was good, it remains
unclear which of the treatments, IVIg or tumor resection, was effective. However, we emphasize that RCC is rarely complicated by
demyelinating peripheral neuropathy, which shows the favorable efficacy of the treatments. Furthermore, previous reports and our own patient
showed the same symptoms and clinical course. In conclusion, malignancies may be complicated with paraneoplastic neurological disorders. The
proper diagnosis and initiation of suitable treatments can yield a favorable outcome.
