Pyomyositis is typically caused by Staphylococcus aureus, and is rare in temperate climates, although its prevalence has been recently
increasing. This infection often involves the thigh, and is associated with immunodeficiency. We report the case of a healthy 20-year-old
Japanese woman who experienced a fever and continuous pain for several days. She was admitted to our hospital and was diagnosed with
pyomyositis after we discovered an abscess between the muscles of her dorsal distal left thigh using computed tomography. This is a rare
case of thigh pyomyositis, as it was caused by group A streptococcus and occurred in an immunocompetent adult from a temperate climate. Our
review of the literature revealed that group A streptococcus pyomyositis typically occurs in temperate climates, among young adults without
any underlying disease, and is associated with a poorer prognosis, compared to general pyomyositis. We suggest that pyomyositis should be
considered when immunocompetent adults present with apparently idiopathic inflammatory muscle lesions. Pyomyositis is a bacterial infection
of the skeletal muscle that is most commonly caused by Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus; 90% of tropical cases and 75% of temperate cases) ,
although it is relatively rare in temperate climates. Another 1–5% of cases involve group A streptococcus, and other rare cases may involve
streptococcus (groups B, C, and G), pneumococcus, Neisseria spp., Haemophilus spp., Aeromonas spp., Serratia spp., Yersinia spp.,
Pseudomonas spp., Klebsiella spp., and Escherichia spp. . The development of pyomyositis is typically associated with immune-related
conditions (e.g., diabetes mellitus, the use of corticosteroids, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS), and malignancies), and most commonly affects the muscles of the lower extremities (i.e., the thighs and calves) . Among
immunocompetent patients, pyomyositis is typically accompanied by a history of a traffic accident or vigorous exercise . Furthermore,
pyomyositis caused by group A streptococcus (GAS) is a known complication of chicken pox among children . Therefore, we report a case of
apparently idiopathic thigh pyomyositis that was caused by GAS in an immunocompetent adult. A 20-year-old Japanese woman was working in a
restaurant and experienced discomfort in her left thigh on the seventh day before her hospital admission. On the next day, she felt pain in
the same area while walking, and subsequently consulted a physician, who prescribed an antiphlogistic sedative patch on the fifth day before
her admission. On the third day before her admission, she developed a fever (38 °C) and subsequently consulted another physician, who
prescribed an antipyretic drug. However, she continued to experience fever and pain in her left thigh flexor during rest. Therefore, she
consulted another physician and was admitted to our hospital, where she was prescribed a single dose of acetaminophen (400 mg). She did not
have a history of domestic or overseas travel, participation in outdoor activities, or trauma. Upon admission, she had a blood pressure of
110/63 mmHg, a pulse of 107 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, and a temperature of 38.9 °C. Her left thigh flexor appeared
slightly red, with mild swelling, warmth, and pain. However, her head, lungs, heart, abdomen, and back did not exhibit redness or swelling.
Her white blood cell count was 12,100 cells/mm3, her hemoglobin level was 10.8 g/dL, and her C-reactive protein level was 24.11 mg/dL. Her
liver and renal functions were normal, and the HIV antibody/p24 antigen test (fourth generation) provided negative results. However,
enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed fluid between the dorsal distal muscles of her left thigh and an enhanced margin of fluid
(Fig. 1), which we diagnosed as an abscess. There were no other abscess-like formations outside of her lower extremities.Fig. 1Enhanced
computed tomography reveals fluid between the dorsal distal muscles of the left thigh and an enhanced margin of fluid (white arrows)
Enhanced computed tomography reveals fluid between the dorsal distal muscles of the left thigh and an enhanced margin of fluid (white
arrows) An incision was made in her left thigh on the day of admission, the abscess was continuously drained, and we treated her using
ampicillin/sulbactam (four doses per day, up to 12 g daily). Two sets of blood cultures provided negative results; however, a culture of a
fasciotomy specimen from the abscess revealed positive results for GAS. Definitive identification of the GAS isolate was performed using the
rapid streptococcus test (Rapid ID32 STREP; bioMerieux SA, Marcy l’Etoile, France). Therefore, we changed the patient’s treatment to
penicillin G (24 million units per day via continuous infusion) on day 5. However, drug eruption in response to the penicillin G was
suspected on day 12, and we changed the antibiotic to clindamycin on day 13 (2700 mg in three doses per day). We stopped the continuous
drainage on day 15, and switched the treatment to oral clindamycin on day 16 (600 mg three times per day). The patient was discharged after
17 days in the hospital, and her antibiotic treatment lasted 4 weeks. We did not observe any side effects that were related to the
clindamycin treatment. The patient has remained in good health during the 1-year follow-up after her discharge from the hospital. We
encountered a rare and apparently idiopathic case of non-tropical pyomyositis that was caused by GAS in a healthy young Japanese woman. In
this context, pyomyositis is rare in temperate climates, although it has recently become more frequent in these climates . The clinical
features of temperate and tropical cases of pyomyositis are summarized in Table 1.Table 1The general clinical features of pyomyositis in
temperate and tropical casesTemperate casesTropical casesAges [1, 2, 7]Adults (elderly)Children (2–5 years) and adults
(35–40 years)Underlying conditions [2, 8]Immunocompromised or serious underlying conditions, such as HIV infection, diabetes mellitus,
leukemia, chronic renal failure, asplenia, scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis, Felty’s syndrome, chemotherapy, or immunosuppressive
treatmentHealthyMicrobiology (S. aureus) (%)60–75>90Positive blood cultures (%)20–305–10Mortality [6, 9] (%)6.0–9.40.5–2.0 The general
clinical features of pyomyositis in temperate and tropical cases The clinical features of the reported GAS pyomyositis cases are summarized
in Table 2 [5, 9–27]. Many of these cases occurred in temperate climates (20/24, 83.3%), and most patients were children or young adults,
with relatively few middle-aged patients (mean age, 30.3 ± 21.0 years). However, the 20 cases of GAS pyomyositis from temperate climates
exhibited a mean age of 31.5 ± 22.3 years, and only included six pediatric cases, which differs from the general characteristics of tropical
pyomyositis. Furthermore, GAS infection is a known complication of chicken pox in children , although only 1 of the 6 pediatric cases was
GAS-positive. Although pyomyositis typically occurs in the lower extremities (9/24, 37.5%) [5, 9–27], other muscle groups can be involved,
such as the iliac , psoas [11, 17], iliopsoas , trunk , neck [13, 18, 26, 27], and upper extremity muscles [14, 16, 19, 22, 25]. Involvement
of multiple muscle groups is also common (9/24, 37.5%). Interestingly, cases of GAS pyomyositis typically resemble general pyomyositis ,
although many cases are apparently idiopathic, which is more similar to cases of tropical pyomyositis . Positive blood cultures were
observed in 9 of the 24 temperate cases (37.5%), approximately 60% (14/24) of the cases involved surgical drainage (which was performed via
fasciotomy), and no cases required amputation. The mortality rate was 12.5% (3/24), and four cases involved an intensive care unit stay,
which would indicate that the temperate cases were more severe than general pyomyositis [6, 9]. Thus, GAS pyomyositis typically occurs in
temperate climates, among young adults without underlying disease, and is associated with a poorer prognosis, compared to general
pyomyositis. The reasons for these observations are unclear, although Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious
Diseases indicates that most GAS pyomyositis cases occur spontaneously or after blunt non-penetrating trauma, and the bacteria are most
likely hematogenously translocated from the throat to the deep tissues. In addition, GAS is the most common cause of bacterial pharyngitis
among children and young adults . Furthermore, children and young adults are often highly active and may readily experience blunt non-
penetrating trauma. Therefore, we hypothesize that the clinical features of GAS pyomyositis may be related to these factors.Table 2Clinical
features of group A streptococcus pyomyositisAge (years)SexTropicalUnderlying conditionArea of infectionSingle or multiple lesionsBlood
culturesICU stayAntibioticsTreatment duration (days)DrainagePrognosisReference2MNoNoneLeft thigh–Positive–2nd cef, PCG,
aminoglycoside40SurgicalRecovered2MNoNoneRight iliac muscleSingleNegativeNo–21NoRecovered4MNoAutismLeft psoas/thighMultiplePositiveYesCTRX,
VCM → PCG, CLDM–SurgicalRecovered5FNoNoneRight thighSingleNegativeNoOxacillin–SurgicalRecovered9MNoNoneRight
iliopsoasMultiplePositiveNo–33SurgicalRecovered19MNoNoneRight thigh and left kneeMultiple–NoPCG–SurgicalRecovered23MYes–Left
armSingleNegative––––Recovered24FNoNoneRight neckSingleNegativeNoCEZ28SurgicalRecovered26FNoNoneLeft thoraco-abdominal
muscleMultipleNegativeYesTicarcillin-clavulanate → PCG7SurgicalRecovered30FNoNoneLeft hand and both thighsMultiplePositiveYesCTRX,
CLDM––Recovered31MYesNoneLeft psoas–Negative–PCG–NoRecovered33FNoDMLeft axillaSingleNegativeNoPCG20SurgicalRecovered38FNoNoneRight
shoulder/armMultipleNegativeNoPCG11SurgicalRecovered44FNoNoneLeft calf/kneeMultiple––CTX, metro, PCG → PCG–SurgicalRecovered48MNoNoneLeft
neckSingleNegativeNoTicarcillin-clavulanate, CLDM → PCG28SurgicalRecovered49FNoNoneRight arm–––PCG––Died52MNoNoneLeft
thighSingle–NoCloxacillin, PCG6SurgicalRecovered53MNoNoneLeft calf–Positive–PCG, aminoglycoside––Died67MNoNoneLeft
thigh–––CEZ → PCG10SurgicalRecovered76MNoIPFRight bicepsSinglePositiveYesPCG31SurgicalRecovered–FYesNoneNeckSinglePositiveNoFlucloxacillin,
PCG–NoRecovered M male; F female; ICU intensive care unit;– not recorded; → switch; 2nd cef second-generation cephalosporin; PCG
benzylpenicillin; CTRX ceftriaxone; VCM vancomycin; CLDM clindamycin; CTX cefotaxime; metro, metronidazole; CEZ cefazolin; DM diabetes
mellitus; IPF idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis Clinical features of group A streptococcus pyomyositis M male; F female; ICU intensive care
unit;– not recorded; → switch; 2nd cef second-generation cephalosporin; PCG benzylpenicillin; CTRX ceftriaxone; VCM vancomycin; CLDM
clindamycin; CTX cefotaxime; metro, metronidazole; CEZ cefazolin; DM diabetes mellitus; IPF idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis It is difficult to
diagnose pyomyositis, as there are no specific symptoms, and the only early symptoms are minor pain and swelling. Therefore, patients are
often slow to consult with a physician, and the diagnosis is often delayed by 2–3 weeks . When the diagnosis is delayed, death can be caused
by septic complications, which include toxic shock syndrome . In the present case, the patient exhibited minor swelling, redness, and warmth
in her thigh, and we were able to rapidly diagnose pyomyositis based on our physical findings and the CT results. This rapid diagnosis
allowed us to quickly start antibiotic treatment and drainage, which are both critical for treating pyomyositis (except during the early
stage) . We reported a rare case of apparently idiopathic thigh pyomyositis that was caused by GAS in an immunocompetent adult. Furthermore,
our review of the literature revealed that GAS pyomyositis typically occurs in temperate climates, among young adults without any underlying
disease, and is associated with a poorer prognosis, compared to general pyomyositis. Therefore, pyomyositis should be considered when a
patient presents with inflammatory lesions in the thigh or other common pyomyositis sites, even when the patient is not immunocompromised
and does not exhibit the standard characteristics of pyomyositis. group A streptococcus computed tomography human immunodeficiency virus
acquired immune deficiency syndrome KM: Managing the patient, writing the manuscript, and revising the manuscript. TK: Writing, correcting,
and revising the manuscript. AK: Management the patient and revising the manuscript. Masami Matsumura: Revising the manuscript and the
figure. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. None. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All data
supporting our findings are contained within the manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
Case Report and any accompanying images. No funding was received for this report.
