Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors are an uncommon neoplasm, which are very rarely located in the pancreas. Clinically and radiologically,
this rare pancreatic tumor presents as an abdominal mass lesion that mimics other pancreatic tumors, and should therefore be considered in
the differential diagnosis of pancreatic tumors. The 15-year-old boy complained of abdominal pain over the left upper quadrant with
intermittent fever for 7 days. Abdominal sonography revealed one cystic lesion with a hyperechoic component in the left upper quadrant of
the abdomen. Surgical excision was performed and postoperative findings indicated a pancreatic tail tumor. The pathology indicated
inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors. To our knowledge, this patient is a unique case as the tumor was located in the pancreatic tail only,
sparing the body. The patient underwent tumor resection and segmental resection of the transverse colon with simple closure. The patient had
no evidence of disease recurrence at 3 years follow-up. Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors of the pancreas in children are extremely rare.
Surgical excision is the standard treatment, and corticosteroids use in children need more large-scale studies. An inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) is characterized histologically by proliferation of fibrous tissue with associated moderate or marked
inflammation, also called inflammatory pseudotumors or plasma cell granulomas. There are not many reports on pancreatic IMTs because of the
rare nature of the condition, so the incidence is difficult to obtain. The most common gastrointestinal tract symptoms of this tumor are
mass, pain, fever, weight loss, and malaise. Diagnosis is based on the histological findings, which consists of variable quantities of
plasma cells, lymphocytes, eosinophils, foamy histiocytes, and mast cells with an inflammatory component. IMTs of the pancreas exhibit slow
growth and do not undergo malignant transformation or exhibit distant metastasis, and most are surgically excised. We report a 15-year-old
male patient with an IMT and a literature review regarding the differential diagnostic, histopathological, and therapeutic features of this
condition. A 15-year-old boy was admitted to E-Da Hospital, Kaohsiung city, Taiwan, with an intraabdominal tumor. He complained of abdominal
pain over the left upper quadrant with intermittent fever for 7 days. The results of laboratory examinations were as follows: white blood
cell count, 15,640 × 106 cells/L; neutrophils, 79.9%; hemoglobin, 9.7 g/dL (or 1.50 mmol/L); hematocrit, 31.1%; platelet count, 432 × 109/L;
glucose, 93 mg/dL; alanine transaminase, 14 U/L (normal range 0–44 U/L); aspartate transaminase, 21 U/L (normal range 0–38 U/L);
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 1.0 ng/mL (normal <5.0 ng/mL); and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA 19–9), 3.0 U/mL (normal <37.0 U/mL).
Abdominal sonography revealed one 5.9 cm cystic lesion with a 3.7 cm hyperechoic component in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen (Fig.
1). Abdominal ultrasound reveals one 5.9 cm cystic lesion with a 3.7 cm hyperechoic component in the left-upper quadrant of the abdomen. An
ultrasound-guided aspiration biopsy was performed, with aspiration cytology showing numerous neutrophils and few spindle cells, and
immunohistochemical studies of the biopsy specimen indicating positivity for vimentin and muscle actin antibody (HHF-35). These results
indicate a tumor of a fibroblastic and muscular origin, respectively (Fig. 2). Immunohistochemical studies show positivity for muscle actin
antibody. (400×). Two weeks later, postoperative findings indicated a pancreatic tail tumor, about 5 cm × 5 cm × 4.3 cm in size, with
adhesion and invasion of the transverse colon. Segmental resection of the transverse colon with simple closure and tumor resection were
performed. The pathology of the specimen revealed a spindle cell tumor with myogenic differentiation. External to the main tumor mass, there
was an inflammatory lesion with aggregates of foamy histiocytes. Immunohistochemical studies showed spindle cells that stained positive for
actin, thereby matching the histopathological features of the biopsy specimen. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of IMT was made. The
patient had an uneventful hospital course, and was discharged 6 days after the operation. After surgery, the patient had complete resolution
of his abdominal pain, and there was no evidence of disease recurrence at 3 years follow-up. IMTs, also known as inflammatory pseudotumors
or plasma cell granulomas, have been described in a wide variety of sites, including the orbit, head and neck region, salivary glands, lung
and liver, spleen, retrorectal space, soft tissues, and peripheral nerves. The mass may compress adjacent structures, leading to a variety
of symptoms, depending on the organs involved, such as local pain, malaise, loss of appetite, wasting, and subfebrile elevation of
temperature. Histologically, IMT is composed of myofibroblastic spindle cells and inflammatory components of variable quantities of plasma
cells, lymphocytes, eosinophils, foamy histiocytes, and mast cells. The definitive etiology of IMT is not clear; however, some possible
causes such as genetic predisposition and infection have been proposed. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase and p80 expression as well as chromosomal
rearrangements involving 2p23 have been reported to be related to IMT. The differential diagnoses of IMC include low grade myofibroblastic
sarcomas and some benign, neoplastic spindle cell lesions, such as leiomyoma and solitary fibrous tumor. The concept of IMT being a benign
reactive lesion is doubtful owing to its high recurrence (as high as 37%), the presence of regional metastases, and the evidence of acquired
clonal chromosomal abnormality. However, the issue of reactive or neoplastic pathogenesis of this lesion remains unsolved. An IMT of the
pancreas is not common, and clinically and radiologically, this rare pancreatic myofibroblastic tumor presents as an abdominal mass lesion
that mimics a malignancy such as pancreatoblastoma, solid-pseudopapillary tumor, or insulinoma. Pancreatoblastoma, the most common
pancreatic neoplasm in young children, should be considered in the differential diagnosis. On computed tomography scan, pancreatoblastomas
are heterogeneous and often multilocular with hyperechoic and enhancing septa, as opposed to IMTs, which usually appear as homogenous and
well-defined solid masses. Solid-pseudopapillary tumors, which are slow-growing tumors usually located in the pancreatic tail, are often
large and encapsulated or circumscribed, with marked degenerative and hemorrhagic components. Solid-pseudopapillary tumors are most commonly
diagnosed in adolescent girls and young women (83%–98.5%), especially in blacks and East Asians. On ultrasonography, the tumors are usually
visualized as an echogenic cyst. Islet cell tumors are either insulinomas or gastrinomas. Insulinomas are composed of beta-cells and cause
fasting hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, and are most common in the body and tail of the pancreas (65%). In contrast, the vast majority of
gastrinomas involve the head of the pancreas (71%). Evidence supporting an autoimmune etiology includes the association of IMTs with other
autoimmune diseases such as Sjögren syndrome and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Nevertheless, there is no evidence that IMTs are
associated with a preceding inflammatory or traumatic process. IMTs of the pancreas exhibit slow growth and do not undergo malignant
transformation or exhibit distant metastasis. Theoretically, resection of the mass lesion would lead to the prompt resolution of symptoms.
However, this rare pancreatic lesion may recur in some instances, such as after incomplete resection. One adult patient was reported to
experience local recurrence of a pancreatic myofibroblastic tumor about 1 year after the Whipple procedure. IMTs of the pancreas are
extremely rare in children, and only 11 cases have been reported in the literature (Table 1). Most of the reported pediatric cases were
girls (8/11, 73%), with only 3 boys (3/11, 27%). Our patient is therefore the 4th reported male child to have this kind of pancreatic tumor.
There was no predominant location of the pediatric pancreatic IMTs in the literature review (head: 7 cases, body with or without the tail: 4
cases). To the best of our knowledge, this boy is a unique case as the tumor was located in the pancreatic tail only, sparing the body.
Compared to pediatric patients, in almost all adult cases, the mass lesions have been found in the pancreatic head. In addition, unlike in
other pediatric patients, the tumor in this patient invaded the transverse colon. Literature review of published cases of inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumor of the pancreas. Most patients encountering IMTs of the pancreas undergo surgical excision. Since it is a benign
lesion, the administration of corticosteroids instead of an operation has been reported in 4 adults and 1 child (tumor size ranging from
2.2–4 cm), and all 5 cases showed remission or regression of the tumors. Although there is only 1 reported case of treatment with
corticosteroids in a child to date, such treatment could be considered in the future. In summary, IMT is an uncommon mass rarely located in
the pancreas, with only 11 cases reported in the literature. However, it must be included in the differential diagnosis, along with other
pancreatic tumors. Most patients encountering IMTs of the pancreas undergo surgical excision, and only 4 adults and 1 child have been
reported to receive medical treatment with corticosteroids. Such treatment should consider in pediatric cases; however, more studies are
needed to assess corticosteroids as a treatment modality where complete surgical resection cannot be performed. Abbreviation: IMT =
inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor. YCL and HKL contributed equally to this work. Ethics: Ethical approval has been granted for this study
by the institutional review board of E-Da hospital. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
