Correspondence to Dr.　Kaname Yoshizawa, k.yoshizawa@nagano-hosp.go.jp Although autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is frequently complicated with
chronic thyroiditis or other autoimmune disorders, reports on its association with immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) are scarce. We
herein describe a case of AIH associated with ITP. A 75-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital due to increased
aminotransferase levels and severe thrombocytopenia. Elevated serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) was detected, and tests for platelet-associated
IgG and anti-nuclear antibody were positive. Following the diagnosis of AIH-associated ITP, prednisolone treatment of 0.6 mg/kg/day resulted
in a decrease in the aminotransferase levels and an increased platelet count. Type 1 autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a progressive liver
disorder predominantly affecting women that is characterized by the presence of circulating autoantibodies [anti-nuclear antibody (ANA)
and/or anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA)], hypergammaglobulinemia, and a favorable response to immunosuppressive therapy (1-5). Individuals
affected with AIH often have concurrent non-hepatic autoimmune disorders, such as chronic thyroiditis (9.2%), Sjögren's syndrome (7.2%), and
rheumatoid arthritis (2.8%), but associations with immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) are rare (1.4%) (5). In the present report, we
describe the clinical outcome of a patient with AIH associated with ITP who was successfully treated with prednisolone (PSL). A 75-year-old
Japanese woman was admitted to the National Hospital Organization Shinshu Ueda Medical Center, Japan, in July 2013 for further investigation
of elevated serum aminotransferase levels and thrombocytopenia. She had begun experiencing anorexia and general malaise one month prior. She
was 153 cm in height and weighed 47 kg. She had no apparent fever or bleeding tendency. A physical examination at presentation revealed mild
hepatomegaly and jaundice. The laboratory data from her referring institution were aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 935 IU/L, alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) 913 IU/L, total bilirubin 7.7 mg/dL, and platelet count 2.8×104/μL. She had been diagnosed with essential
hypertension three years prior and was taking a candesartan cilexetil/amlodipine besilate compound product. She had no other underlying
diseases or medical history. The woman neither smoked nor drank. Her family history was negative for liver or autoimmune disease, and she
denied exposure to agents relevant to hepatitis, such as blood transfusion or herbal (kampo) medicine. The laboratory data on admission at
our facility (Table 1, 2) showed severe thrombocytopenia and increased levels of hepato-biliary enzymes and gamma-globulin. Elevated serum
immunoglobulin G (IgG) was noted as well. Tests for ANA and ASMA were positive. Platelet-binding IgG (PBIgG) was negative, but platelet-
associated IgG (PAIgG) was 894 ng/107 cells (nl: ＜47). Helicobacter pylori IgG testing was negative. Her thyroid-stimulating hormone and
free-thyroxin levels were within normal ranges, although anti-thyroglobulin (Tg) and anti-thyroperoxidase (TPO) antibodies were positive.
The diagnostic criteria for disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) proposed by the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare were
not satisfied in this patient (score: 4). Tests for the hepatitis A, B, C, and E viruses, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and herpes
simplex virus were all negative. Her human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing pattern was DRB1*04:05 and DRB1*15:01. Enhanced abdominal computed
tomography showed no cirrhosis or splenomegaly. A bone marrow examination uncovered normoplastic marrow with platelet depletion and a
megakaryocyte count of 30/μL (Fig. 1). Laboratory Findings on Admission. Ret: reticulocyte, FDP: fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products
Laboratory Findings on Admission (2). ANA: anti-nuclear antibody, ASMA: anti-smooth muscle antibody, AMA: anti-mitochondria antibody, anti-
LKM1 Ab: anti-liver/kidney microsome type 1 antibody, PAIgG: platelet-associated IgG, PBIgG: platelet-binding IgG, Tg antibody: anti-
thyroglobulin antibody, TPO antibody: anti-thyroperoxidase antibody, H. pylori Ab: Helicobacter pylori antibody, EBV: Epstein-Barr virus,
CMV: cytomegalovirus, HSV: herpes simplex virus, HLA: human leukocyte antigen The histological findings of a bone marrow examination. (a)
Normoplastic marrow with platelet depletion was evident. (b) Megakaryocytes without dysplasia were present. Magnification: (a) ×40,
Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining; (b) ×400, H&E staining. A diagnosis of ITP was made based on the above clinical and laboratory
findings. According to the criteria of the International Autoimmune Hepatitis Scoring System (6), the patient's pre-treatment clinical score
without histology was 16 (female: +2, ALP (alkaline phosphatase)/ALT ratio: +2, IgG level: +2, ANA titer: +2, anti-mitochondrial antibody
(AMA): 0, viral markers: +3, drugs: +1, alcohol: +2 and immune disease: +2), and indicative of definite AIH. Thus, we diagnosed her as
having type 1 AIH associated with ITP. Liver biopsy was not performed at the time due to severe thrombocytopenia. The patient promptly began
treatment with 30 mg/day (0.6 mg/kg/day) of PSL on Day 5 of admission, which quickly restored her liver enzyme levels to within normal
limits (Fig. 2). A percutaneous liver biopsy specimen was obtained on Day 14 (Fig. 3) since the platelet numbers had increased to
approximately 10×104/μL. Her post-biopsy score was 19. Tissue histology revealed centrilobular necrosis (Fig. 3a and c), infiltration of
lymphocytic and plasma cells, and mild interface hepatitis around the portal vein (Fig. 3a and d). The inflammatory activity and fibrosis
stage were classified as A1F1 (Fig. 3a and b) according to the Metavia scoring system (7). Clinical course. The histological findings of
liver biopsy. (a) The pathological diagnosis was mild chronic hepatitis. (b) Mild portal and perivenular fibrosis was seen. (c) The specimen
exhibited centrilobular necrosis. (d) The specimen showed infiltration of inflammatory cells consisting of lymphocytes and plasma cells,
with mild interface hepatitis in the portal zone. Magnification: (a) ×40, Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining; (b) ×40, Azan-Mallory
staining; (c) and (d) ×400, H&E staining. Following an uneventful treatment course, the patient's serum transaminase and IgG levels became
elevated without thrombocytopenia due to a recurrence of AIH when PSL was tapered to 5 mg/day. Restoring the steroid dose to 20 mg/day
normalized her laboratory findings, and the serum transaminase and IgG levels and platelet count have since remained normal for over 19
months with a maintenance dose of 10 mg/day PSL (Fig. 2). Her PAIgG levels decreased to near-normal values (54 ng/107 cells). Informed
consent was obtained from the patient for inclusion in the study. AIH is defined as a chronic liver disease with unknown etiological factors
that is associated with aberrant auto-reactivity and a genetic predisposition (1-5). In contrast, ITP is an acquired autoimmune disorder
mediated by antibodies against platelet membrane glycoprotein (GP) Ib or IIb/IIIa complexes and thrombopoietin receptor (8-10). The precise
mechanism underlying ITP remains elusive (11), and ITP complicating AIH is rare and of uncertain pathogenesis (12-14). In Japan, given that
type 1 AIH represents the overwhelming majority (15) of AIH cases, all reported cases of AIH associated with ITP have been type 1. Nagase et
al. summarized 16 cases of AIH associated with ITP appearing in the Japanese literature (12). While AIH preceded ITP in 5 cases, the
disorders manifested simultaneously in the others. In agreement with these findings, Wada et al. reported on a patient with a six-year
history of AIH who developed ITP (13), and Yamaike et al. described an additional case of simultaneous AIH and ITP occurrence (14). Relapses
of AIH and/or ITP were not found in any case. In our patient, either AIH and ITP developed simultaneously or AIH shortly preceded ITP,
because liver histology (biopsied 9 days after commencing steroid therapy) showed very mild fibrosis (Fig. 3b). The first-line therapy for
both AIH and ITP is corticosteroids (1-5). Roughly 24-50% of AIH patients experience relapse during steroid tapering or withdrawal (1,15).
Approximately 75% of patients with ITP respond to corticosteroids, but only 5-30% achieve a sustained remission (16). To our knowledge, the
present case is the first of its kind, showing relapsing AIH and non-relapsing ITP during steroid tapering. We suspected that the response
thresholds of the two diseases to PSL were different in our subject. HLA regions have been strongly associated with autoimmune disease. HLA
class II molecules on antigen-presenting cells play a crucial role in triggering the immune response, which begins with the recognition of
peptide antigens in the HLA class II groove by the T-cell receptor of CD4 T cells through direct contact of both molecules. We previously
reported that the most influential gene associated with type 1 AIH susceptibility was HLA-DRB1*04:05 (17,18), while DRB1*15:01 conferred
disease resistance (19). Kuwana et al. described several relationships between HLA and ITP. Strong associations between anti-GP
autoantibodies and HLA class II genes have been identified, as follows: anti-GPIIb-IIIa antibody association with DRB1*04:05 and DQB*04:01;
and anti-GPIb-IX antibody with DRB1*08:03 and DQB1*06:01 (20). The HLA typing pattern in the present case was DRB1*04:05 and DRB1*15:01.
Thus, the DRB1*04:05 allele may be linked to AIH associated with ITP. However, it is difficult to explain the low frequency of AIH with ITP,
although the immunologically different mechanisms of the two disorders, which remain unresolved, may be involved. Since ITP and AIH manifest
as autoimmune-mediated disorders, the treatment for both conditions is PSL. Here, AIH recurred after PSL tapering but ITP did not. This
differential immunosuppressive effect is of clinical interest and may provide insights into the mechanisms and interplay of autoimmune
diseases. This study was conducted and supported by Health Labor Science Research Grants for Measures for Intractable Diseases, the
Intractable Hepato-Biliary Diseases Study Group in Japan. We thank Yuki Akahane, Asami Yamazaki, Rie Misawa and Kiyomi Tanaka for their
technical assistance and Trevor Ralph for his English editorial assistance.
