This report describes the usefulness of dermoscopy as a supportive diagnostic tool in a pseudomonas folliculitis case. Pseudomonas
folliculitis (PF) is a community-acquired infection, typically resulting from the bacterial colonization of hair follicles after direct
exposure to contaminated water (e.g. in whirlpools, swimming pools, water slides and bathtubs), or the use of contaminated bathing objects
(e.g. sponges and inflatable pool toys). However, obvious sources of contamination are not always detectable.1 Lesions usually appear on the
skin within hours or days following the exposure and consist of pruritic, erythematous macules that progress to 2-10mm in diameter, and
edematous papules, some of which have a follicle-centered pustule.1 This rash favors the intertriginous areas or sites covered by bathing
suits and it usually fades away spontaneously within 2-10 days.1 PF is commonly mistaken for other disorders presenting with erythemato-
edematous papules and, consequently, unnecessary therapies are frequently prescribed.1 This report describes the usefulness of dermoscopy as
a supportive diagnostic tool in a PF case. A 41-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a 5-day history of an itchy rash, localized mainly
on her armpits, inguinal areas and thighs. Before coming to the clinic, she had been diagnosed with insect bites but topical steroid
application had not entailed any improvement. The patient was otherwise healthy and was not taking any medication. Her past medical history
was unremarkable and she could not recall any obvious recent exposures to potential Pseudomonas aeruginosa sources. Physical examination
revealed numerous erythemato-edematous papules and a few pustules (Figures 1A and 1B). On polarized light noncontact dermoscopic examination
(DermLite DL3 x10; 3Gen, San Juan Capistrano, CA, USA), all the papules exhibited a pinkish background with a paler centre and a central
vellus hair, thus highlighting the folliculocentric nature of the rash; no distinct vessel was evident (Figure 1C). Swab cultures taken from
the pustules were positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, thus confirming the diagnosis of PF. Gentamicin 0.1% cream (twice daily) was
prescribed and lesions cleared after five days. Figure 1 Physical examination revealing several erythemato-edematous papules and a few
pustules on the right armpit (a) and inguinal area (b). Polarized light noncontact dermoscopic examination (X10 magnification) of a papule
displays a pinkish background with a paler centre and a central thin vellus hair (black arrow); no distinct vessel is evident (c). Physical
examination revealing several erythemato-edematous papules and a few pustules on the right armpit (a) and inguinal area (b). Polarized light
noncontact dermoscopic examination (X10 magnification) of a papule displays a pinkish background with a paler centre and a central thin
vellus hair (black arrow); no distinct vessel is evident (c). The main, challenging differential diagnoses for PF include insect bites and
nodular scabies. 1,2 The distinction from such conditions is typically clinical, evidenced by the folliculocentric nature of the lesions and
positive lesional swabs.1,2 However, detecting the former feature may be troublesome, particularly in subjects with fair skin/hair and when
lesions are located on sites with few terminal hairs. Dermoscopy is a low-cost, noninvasive technique that allows the clinician to note
significant findings, which are not visible to the naked eye.3-10 In recent years, its use has been extended to numerous "general"
dermatoses to assist clinical diagnosis. 3-10 In this PF case, dermoscopy proved helpful in identifying the vellus hairs at the centre of
each lesion, otherwise not clinically visible, thus displaying the folliculocentric nature of the rash and therefore ruling out insect bites
and nodular scabies. In fact, the lesions of these conditions are typically not centered around follicles and usually reveal other
dermoscopic findings. In particular, insect bites may display a central punctum and some haemorrhagic spots (personal observations), while
nodular scabies is generally characterized by mites ("hang glider sign") and/or burrows ("jet with condensation trails").3 Furthermore, in
the authors' opinion, dermoscopy may be useful even to distinguish PF from staphylococcal folliculitis since, unlike the former, its lesions
typically do not exhibit a central pale aspect (corresponding to the remarkable oedema present in PF) but display central pustules on a
reddish background with or without nonspecific vessels.1,6 In conclusion, dermoscopy may be a useful tool for assisting the noninvasive
diagnosis of some challenging PF cases. Further studies on larger groups of patients are needed to support the observations. Conflict of
Interest: None Financial Support: None Work performed at the Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Institute of Dermatology -
University of Udine â€“ Udine, Italy.
