Since constrictive pericarditis is most often idiopathic and the pathophysiology remains largely unknown, both the diagnosis and the
treatment can be challenging. However, by definition, inflammatory processes are central to this disease process. Amniotic membrane patches
have been shown to possess anti-inflammatory properties and are believed to be immune privileged. Due to these properties, amniotic membrane
patches were applied intraoperatively in a complicated patient presenting with constrictive pericarditis. A patient with a history of
multiple cardiac surgeries presented with marked fatigue, worsening dyspnea and sinus tachycardia. He was found to have constrictive
physiology during cardiac catheterization, with cardiac MRI demonstrating hepatic vein dilatation, atrial enlargement and ventricular
narrowing. After amniotic membrane patch treatment and pericardiectomy, post-operative cardiac MRI failed to demonstrate any appreciable
pericardial effusion or inflammation, with no increased T2 signal that would suggest edema. Given the positive results seen in this complex
patient, we suggest continued research into the beneficial properties of amniotic membrane patches in cardiac surgery. The online version of
this article (doi:10.1186/s13019-017-0567-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Constrictive
pericarditis results in a thickened and less-elastic pericardium, which can lead to incomplete diastolic filling and myocardial ischemia .
Since it is rare and the presenting symptoms are similar to those of several other disorders, the diagnosis can often be challenging. The
diagnosis is usually made using cardiac catheterization or echocardiography as a part of the patient’s initial clinical evaluation. Although
there are multiple etiologies of constrictive pericarditis, in most cases, the pathophysiology is idiopathic or may occur following cardiac
surgical procedures including orthotopic heart transplant . Constrictive pericarditis is commonly treated with pericardiectomy; however even
following surgical intervention, long-term survival decreases over time and further diminishes when patient history includes multiple
cardiac re-operations . It has recently been demonstrated that amniotic stem cell therapy consisting of either stem cells with extracellular
matrix or extracellular matrix alone can decrease fibrosis and post operative inflammation in humans [4, 5]. Specifically, extracellular
matrix in the form of human amniotic membrane allograft has shown to significantly reduce post-ischemic cardiac dysfunction, improve
ischemic heart repair, and increase blood flow recovery in rat and mouse models [6, 7]. This immunoprivileged tissue does not need to be
donor-recipient matched to produce positive outcomes, further supporting its convenience of use and value . In the context of these anti-
inflammatory properties, and since inflammatory processes are central to the pathophysiology of pericarditis, amniotic membrane patches were
applied intraoperatively in a patient presenting with constrictive pericarditis as outlined below. A 34-year-old male had a history of
orthotopic heart transplant for hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and subsequent tricuspid repair for severe tricuspid regurgitation
due to prolapse. The heart transplant was performed at a medical center in a neighboring state, with both prior surgeries performed by two
different surgeons. He was doing well for over 3 years following these procedures, maintained with immunotherapy consisting of 2.5 mg
Prograf® BID and 250 mg CellCept® daily as noted by the CT 7 Transplant Database. He then developed a one-week history of marked fatigue,
worsening shortness of breath, and sinus tachycardia on electrocardiogram and was transferred to our facility from a neighboring state. Upon
arrival, the patient’s ejection fraction was significantly reduced at less than 20%, compared to his usual baseline of 60% last recorded
1.5 years prior to this presentation. Given the concern for acute transplant rejection, the patient underwent endomyocardial biopsy via
catheterization, which revealed evidence of Grade 1R mild acute cellular rejection without the presence of antibody-mediated rejection as
evidenced by a pathologic antibody-mediated rejection (pAMR) of 0. Hemodynamic findings from right and left cardiac catheterization revealed
equalization of diastolic filling pressures with discordance after volume loading, consistent with constrictive physiology. Additionally,
Freidreich’s sign was present with both steep x and y descent of the jugular venous pressure (JVP) tracing with increased left and right
ventricular diastolic pressures with dip and plateau (square root sign). The patient then underwent a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) study to further evaluate the constrictive physiology. Cardiac MRI revealed mild pericardial thickening, mild flattening and bounce of
the interventricular septum, intermediate epicardial signal on pre-contrast T2-weighted images and demonstrated intermediate delayed
enhancement with post-contrast T1-weighted images consistent with fibrotic tissue (Fig. 1a, b). There was also moderate to moderate-severe
tricuspid regurgitation. Given the hemodynamic values from cardiac catheterization and pericardial thickening, surgery was recommended to
replace the tricuspid valve and remove the fibrotic epicardial material.Fig. 1Post-contrast T1-weighted cardiac MRI images. Preoperative MRI
short-axis (a) and 2-, 3-, and 4-chamber long axis (b) delayed-enhanced inversion-recovery images demonstrate pericardial thickening and
epicardial enhancement (arrows) with subtle periventricular septal flattening. On dynamic cine imaging and anatomic imaging (not shown)
there is septal bounce during Valsalva suggesting ventricular inter-dependance and biatrial enlargement with dilated IVC and hepatic veins.
These findings are absent on postoperative cardiac MRI (c-d) Post-contrast T1-weighted cardiac MRI images. Preoperative MRI short-axis (a)
and 2-, 3-, and 4-chamber long axis (b) delayed-enhanced inversion-recovery images demonstrate pericardial thickening and epicardial
enhancement (arrows) with subtle periventricular septal flattening. On dynamic cine imaging and anatomic imaging (not shown) there is septal
bounce during Valsalva suggesting ventricular inter-dependance and biatrial enlargement with dilated IVC and hepatic veins. These findings
are absent on postoperative cardiac MRI (c-d) Using a redo sternotomy approach, complete phrenic to phrenic pericardiectomy, removal of
Gore-Tex membrane from previous surgery and a tricuspid valve replacement were completed. Gross intraoperative findings of the pericardial
space included thick, gelatinous material on the anterior surface of the heart, and the pericardium and Gore-Tex membrane were fused to the
thickened pericardium on the anterior surface of the heart. (Fig. 2a) Prior to closure, four human allograft membranes were topically placed
over the right atrium, right ventricle and left ventricle (Fig. 2b) for their anti-fibrotic and anti-inflammatory properties [7, 8]. The
surgical pathology report later confirmed fibrosis of the explanted tricuspid valve, pericardial fibrosis, and chronic pericardial
inflammation. Though constrictive physiology was still noted, post-contrast T1-weighted cardiac MRI images demonstrate significant
improvement (Fig. 1c, d). Furthermore, a five-week postoperative fat-suppressed T2-weighted MRI revealed no appreciable postoperative
inflammation and an absence of pericardial effusion (Fig. 3).Fig. 2Intraoperative images. Thick gelatinous material was found on the
anterior surface of the heart, with the pericardium and Gore-Tex membrane fused to the thickened pericardium at the anterior surface (a).
Four human allograft membranes were topically placed over the right atrium, right ventricle, and left ventricle (b) for their anti-fibrotic
and anti-inflammatory properties Fig. 3T2 Fat Sat Horizontal long-axis fat-suppressed T-2 weighted images. Preoperative cardiac MRI (a)
reveals hepatic vein dilatation, atrial enlargement and ventricular narrowing (arrows). Post-operative cardiac MRI (b) fails to demonstrate
any appreciable pericardial effusion or inflammation, with no increased T2 signal that would suggest edema (arrows) Intraoperative images.
Thick gelatinous material was found on the anterior surface of the heart, with the pericardium and Gore-Tex membrane fused to the thickened
pericardium at the anterior surface (a). Four human allograft membranes were topically placed over the right atrium, right ventricle, and
left ventricle (b) for their anti-fibrotic and anti-inflammatory properties T2 Fat Sat Horizontal long-axis fat-suppressed T-2 weighted
images. Preoperative cardiac MRI (a) reveals hepatic vein dilatation, atrial enlargement and ventricular narrowing (arrows). Post-operative
cardiac MRI (b) fails to demonstrate any appreciable pericardial effusion or inflammation, with no increased T2 signal that would suggest
edema (arrows) Constrictive pericarditis is difficult to diagnose given its rare occurence and that the presenting symptoms are similar to
those of several other disorders. In our patient, this diagnosis was further complicated by his history of orthotopic heart transplant.
While the techniques continue to evolve, imaging patients in order to optimize diagnosis following cardiac transplant is limited . Given our
patient’s surgical history and clinical presentation, the constrictive physiology from cardiac catheterization was considered to be a more
reliable diagnostic measure than both the MRI and echocardiogram findings. The case discussed serves as a prime example for the need to
develop alternate non-invasive imaging techniques or algorithms for improved diagnostic capacity in patients with prior orthotopic heart
transplant. Another confounding variable in diagnosing constrictive pericarditis in our patient was the steep y descent on JVP. Although
Freidreich’s sign is suggestive for constrictive pericarditis, our patient was also diagnosed with severe tricuspid regurgitation. However,
despite these diagnostic difficulties, the patient was known to have prior Gore-Tex membrane placement during surgery. This iatrogenic
component is another factor that may, in part, explain his constrictive physiology. As discussed previously, pericardiectomy is often
performed as a curative procedure for constrictive pericarditis. However there are instances, particularly for patients with advanced
constrictive pericarditis or with radiation disease, in which pericardiectomy may not offer a cure or desired long-term result . For these
patients with higher risk factors, it may be beneficial to explore additional or alternative treatment options. Current treatment of
recurrent pericarditis has focused on targeting inflammation, and has shown overall positive outcomes . Given our patient’s extensive
cardiac history of orthotopic heart transplant, reoperation for tricuspid valve repair, and Gore-Tex adhesions, extraordinary care was
initiated in an attempt to resolve his constrictive pericarditis. As an emerging anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic treatment, the use of
human allograft membrane has proven to be both safe and effective in humans thus far and continues to pique interest as an alternative
therapy option [7, 8]. The anti-inflammatory properties of this treatment were exemplified, as our patient had no evidence of inflammation
notable on T2-weighted MRI five weeks postoperatively (Fig. 3b). Given the positive results, we suggest continued research into the
beneficial properties of amniotic membrane patches in cardiac surgery. Constrictive pericarditis is difficult to treat, and even a
pericardiectomy may not offer a cure or desired long-term result. Given the inflammatory processes central to this disease process, amniotic
membrane patches were used as anti-inflammatory treatment in a patient with a complicated history. With the amniotic membrane patch
treatment and pericardiectomy, our patient had no evidence of inflammation five weeks postoperatively on T2-weighted MRI, highlighting the
importance of continued research in this area. Additional file 1:CARE Checklist – 2016: Information for writing a case report. (DOCX 603 kb)
CARE Checklist – 2016: Information for writing a case report. (DOCX 603 kb) Bis in die (twice a day) Jugular venous pressure Magnetic
resonance imaging Pathologic antibody-mediated rejection The authors would like to thank the patient and family, University of Arizona
College of Medicine, Department of Surgery- Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery. The authors declare no funding for this publication. All
data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article [and its Additional file 1]. KM, AF, TP, DS, RA-
Participated in data collection and interpretation. Wrote and revised manuscript. AD, MF, IO, CJ- Participated in data collection and
interpretation. ZK- Performed described surgery, interpreted data, revised manuscript. All authors approved the final version of the
manuscript. The author (Zain Khalpey) of this publication has (i) received research support from Amnio Technology, LLC, and (ii) served as a
paid consultant for Amnio Technology, LLC within the twenty-four month period preceding this publication. The terms of this arrangement have
been reviewed and appropriately managed by the University of Arizona in accordance with its conflict of interest policies. Additionally,
author Tia Pilikian receives salary support from Amnio Technology. Deceased patient, family could not be reached at time of submission.
Ethics approval and consent were obtained through a University of Arizona Institutional Review Board approved study (CAPTURED,
IRB#1300000194).
