Metastatic pheochromocytoma in the spine is rare, and there is no standard curative management. Treatment via open surgery is often risky in
the perioperative period, while osteoplasty by cement augmentation is a less invasive option. We describe 2 patients with recurrence of
pheochromocytoma involving the spine and the pelvis who were successfully treated with osteoplasty by cement augmentation. A 31-year-old
female underwent cement augmentation for a pelvic lesion 6 months after the resection and screw fixation of an L3 lesion. A 58-year-old male
underwent cement augmentation to directly destroy the functional tumor, with a surgical decompression 6 months later. Both patients showed
appropriate destruction of the tumor, adequate pain relief, and the decreased release of catecholamine from metastatic lesions. Osteoplasty
by cement augmentation may be a treatment option for patients with metastatic pheochromocytoma who cannot undergo appropriate surgery or
decline surgery. This represents a safe approach to sustainably relieve pain and stabilize vertebral bodies with metastatic malignant
pheochromocytoma. Pheochromocytomas are rare tumors with an incidence of 1 per 100,000 per year, 10% to 20% of which will develop to
malignant extraadrenal pheochromocytoma. Malignancy is defined by the presence of metastases and local invasion rather than by histological
criteria. Spinal metastases are extremely rare, with various clinical presentations based on the primary lytic bone lesions that cause
destruction or compression of the spinal cord, clinically manifesting as pain or neurological deficit. Previous reports investigating
treatment methods for malignant tumor in the spine have studied preoperative embolization of vascular supply, chemotherapy and/or
radiotherapy, and/or tumor resection, and concluded that open curative resection of the sectional lesion was effective. However, open
surgery carries marked challenges including hemodynamic drastic fluctuation induced by catecholamine secretion from the tumor, blood loss
caused by lesion destruction, and spinal stabilization. Herein, we present 2 cases in which pheochromocytoma of the spine was successfully
treated via osteoplasty by cement augmentation for the first time; this method deactivated the neuroendocrine systems, reduced perioperative
blood loss, and stabilized the spine. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this article. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the editors of MEDICINE. Because this article does not involve any human or animal trials, there
is no need to conduct special ethic review and the ethical approval is not necessary. A 31-year-old female with a 17-year history of
hypertension (maximum blood pressure (BP) ≤200/120 mm Hg) underwent surgical resection of adrenal pheochromocytoma 5 years previously.
Postoperative BP returned to normal with no evidence of distant metastasis during a 4-year follow-up. However, the patient experienced
severe paroxysmal headaches provoked by hypertensive peaks, moderate low back pain and numbness of the right lower limb for 1 year before
being referred to our hospital. Two extraadrenal pheochromocytomas were found, with no recurrence of the primary tumor (Fig. 1A). The
lesions were protruding into the spinal canal and causing lumbar canal stenosis. Preoperative assessment was performed, including routine
laboratory tests (electrolytes, kidney function tests, complete blood count), cardiac function (electrocardiograph (ECG), ultrasonic
cardiogram (UCG), chest radiography), and endocrinological evaluation (plasma chromogranin A, metanephrines, catecholamines). Urine
catecholamine was 133.71 μg/24 hour (normal: <50 μg/24 hour). Case 1. (A) MRI showing enhanced lesions in the right pedicle and facet of L3
and the right ilium. (B) Hematoxylin and eosin-stained histological sections from the biopsy specimen confirmed extraadrenal
pheochromocytoma. (C) The location of 2-step surgery. In the first operation, paraganglioma in L3 was resected and reconstructed with a
screw and rod system; 6 months later, osteoplasty procedure by cement was done in the right posterior ilium. We initially planned a 2-step
resection of the L3 and pelvic lesions. The patient was medically optimized with alpha- and beta-adrenergic blockers for 6 weeks, and showed
reduced catecholamine and normal BP. The patient was placed in the prone position under general anesthesia. We exposed the L2-L5 spinous
processes and laminae, resected a 3 cm × 3 cm × 2 cm dark purple tumor mass on the right facet between L3/4 and the L3 pedicle, and
performed fixation using a Moss SI screw-rod system. Perioperative BP was stable and intraoperative blood loss was 800 mL. Pathological
examination was positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin and P53, occasionally positive for S-100, but negative for melan-A and
calretinin, which confirmed the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma (Fig. 1B). The patient refused radiotherapy and was discharged after 8 days
with ongoing beta-blocker medication. One month later, the urine catecholamine had reduced to 39.09 μg/24 hour and BP was normal. However,
BP rose (up to 150/100 mm Hg) after cessation of antihypertensive drugs, and urine catecholamine increased to 139.50 μg/24 hour 3 months
after surgery. The BP remained high (140/90 mm Hg) at the next 2-month follow-up, despite ongoing beta-blocker administration. Six months
later, the patient was too scared to undergo the previously designed resection of the pelvic lesion. The patient instead gave permission for
percutaneous osteoplasty by polymethylmethacrylate to be performed under local anesthesia (Fig. 1C). The BP markedly increased to 200/120 mm
Hg when the needle penetrated the tumor, but had decreased to normal after 2 minutes. The patient was discharged 2 days later without
complication. The beta-blocker medication was gradually reduced and was stopped at 2 months postoperatively. During 2 years of follow-up,
both BP and urine catecholamine were normal. There were no complications associated with osteoplasty during the follow-up period. A 58-year-
old male underwent complete excision of right retroperitoneal pheochromocytoma with no metastasis 4 years previously. The patient
experienced high BP (range 160–120/135–90 mm Hg) and progressive low back pain with radiating pain to the right lower limb for 1 year.
Physical examination revealed a stiff lumbar region, right lower limb hyperesthesia, positive Lasegue's sign, and urine catecholamine of up
to 151.24 μg/24 hour. Computed tomography and plain radiography revealed a soft mass outside the sacrum, as well as a compressed dural sac,
which was confirmed by bone scanning (Fig. 2A and B). The patient was medically optimized with phenoxybenzamine and an alpha-adrenergic
blocker. Case 2. (A) Computed tomography showing the lesion in the sacrum. (B) 99mTc HYNIC TOC SPECT/CT scans showing uptake in the same
area. (C) The back wall of the S1 vertebral body was deficient and the cement leaked into the canal. (D) Hematoxylin and eosin-stained
histological sections from the biopsy specimen confirmed extraadrenal pheochromocytoma. (E) Decompression operation was undertaken 2 months
after the sacroplasty procedure. Cement augmentation was performed to destroy the functional tumor with temporary embolization of the
internal iliac artery under local anesthesia (Fig. 2C). The BP and heart rate markedly increased to 220/150 mm Hg and 140 beats/minute,
respectively, when the needle penetrated the tumor, and gradually decreased to normal within 5 minutes. Pathological examination confirmed
the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma (Fig. 2D). Postoperatively, the patient experienced pain relief with no improvement of leg numbness. The
patient was unwilling to undergo further treatment and was discharged after 8 days. The dosage of phenoxybenzamine was gradually reduced.
The BP remained normal, and phenoxybenzamine was stopped 2 months later. Six months later, surgical decompression was performed to improve
the impairment caused by the cement (Fig. 2E), with intraoperative blood loss of 400 mL. Nerve impairment improved to almost normal. To
date, the patient has no recurrent symptoms in 6 months of follow-up. The latest urine catecholamine was 21.43 μg/24 hour. There were no
complications associated with osteoplasty during the follow-up period. Reports of spinal pheochromocytoma are rare, 35% of which are
metastases. Low back pain and sciatica are common presentations, with progressive hyperesthesia and sensory-motor dysfunction; elevated BP
and headache due to catecholamines are less common. All of these symptoms were present in the cases in the present report. Most previous
cases with metastatic pheochromocytoma have undergone preoperative embolization, chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy, and/or tumor resection.
Inspired by percutaneous ethanol and cryoablation treatment of tumor-induced osteomalacia, we attempted cement augmentation here for the
first time. Metastatic pheochromocytoma is hypervascular and therefore carries a high risk of perioperative blood loss, generally requiring
preoperative embolization. We minimized this risk of blood loss with a new strategy of managing intraoperative bleeding by using cement only
or performing perioperative temporary embolization. Our results were similar to previous reports, in that the cement could provide adequate
stability to maintain the column solidity and relieve pain. We further confirmed tumor destruction immediately after surgery, due to the
reduction in catecholamine levels and change in related symptoms caused by cell toxicity and hyperthermic cytotoxicity of cement. Although
alpha- and beta-blockers were used for preoperative adjustment, perioperative BP still increased rapidly when the needle penetrated the
tumor. This increasing BP progressively decreased back to normal levels in less than 5 minutes. Continual monitoring and vasoactive
preparation were needed, although blood loss was small. One postoperative complication was cement leakage into the canal and subsequent
spinal cord compression. There was no sign of tumor recurrence during follow-up (2.5 and 1 year, respectively) in the present study,
indicating that the local malignant tumors were eradicated. Only 4 sacral pheochromocytomas have been reported since 1998. Coles et al
enucleated the S3 tumor posteriorly, and the patient was disease-free after 2 years of follow-up. Another case with a tumor at S1 underwent
therapy with I131 metaiodobenzylguanidine continually after failure of radiotherapy, and showed no tumor growth after 5 years. A third case
with an S1–S2 lesion underwent open resection and received a total dose of 3000 cGy in 10 fractions, with no follow-up. In the fourth case,
the sacral tumor was effectively treated with a combination of 4 methods, including preoperative sacral embolization, percutaneous
cryoablation, alcohol ablation, and sacroplasty.. In the present report, we confirmed that osteoplasty was able to relieve local pain caused
by metastatic spinal pheochromocytoma in 2 cases. To date, surgical management of spinal pheochromocytoma has remained under evaluation,
with no standard criteria. We described the first 2 cases of metastatic spinal pheochromocytoma that underwent cement augmentation. In both
cases, the local tumor was successfully controlled, with pain relief and decreased catecholamine levels. This might be a useful strategy to
achieve rapid and sustained neurological improvements for patients with recurrence of pheochromocytoma involving the spine and the pelvis.
Although there were no complications associated with osteoplasty in these 2 patients, the safety of this approach still needs to be
confirmed in studies with larger sample sizes and longer follow-up periods. Surgical time, cement volume, and velocity are critical factors
that need further investigation. Abbreviations: BP = blood pressure, cGy = centigray, ECG = electrocardiograph, UCG = ultrasonic cardiogram.
Funding: This study was supported by Peking Union Medical College Youth Research Funds (2016) (Project No. 3332016010; to XK) and Peking
Union Medical College Graduate Student Innovation Fund (2015) (Project No. 2015-1002-02-09; to XK). The funders had no role in study design,
data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. SC, XK, and CY contributed equally to this work. The
authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
