Dengue fever has an expanded clinical spectrum ranging from an asymptomatic infection to life threatening dengue hemorrhagic fever and
refractory shock. Dengue infection in pregnancy can be a diagnostic dilemma, particularly considering the physiological changes in pregnancy
and the obstetric complications encountered in clinical practice. Hence the knowledge of its diagnosis and management in its atypical
presentations is of paramount importance. Here we report an unusual case of uncomplicated dengue encephalopathy in a term mother, probably
the first to be reported from the Indian subcontinent. A 28 year old woman, 37 weeks of pregnancy presented with fever of four days
duration. She eventually developed irritability, altered sensorium, somnolence, and unresponsiveness to commands by the 5th day of febrile
illness without any circulatory compromise. Physical examination and investigations including serology confirmed dengue fever. After
excluding all other possible causes, the transient neurological deterioration was finally attributed to dengue encephalopathy which is an
uncommon manifestation of the disease, particularly in pregnancy. Her deteriorated neurological status which had lasted for 6 days improved
spontaneously with the convalescence of dengue infection. Cautious fluid management was carried out in correlation to clinical and
hematological parameters. The pregnancy was continued uncomplicated till the platelet count had risen to more than 50,000 cells/cumm. She
delivered vaginally a healthy male baby. Dengue fever in pregnancy is increasingly being encountered due to its rising disease burden.
Dengue encephalitis/encephalopathy must be suspected in the differential diagnosis of fever and altered sensorium, even in pregnancy, in the
tropical countries where the infection is rampant. Management of dengue infection in term pregnancy is a challenge for both the clinician
and obstetrician. Further discussion and research are mandatory to decide on optimal management of these patients, with regard to
monitoring, fluid management, and the precise timing and mode of delivery in order to prevent fatal morbidity and mortality to both mother
and fetus. Dengue is an mosquito-borne infection, caused by flavivirus serotypes (I–IV). It represents a significant burden of disease in
the tropics, the global incidence is rising . Dengue infection is a self limiting infection which may manifest with a spectrum of disease
ranging from an uncomplicated febrile illness to various hemorrhagic manifestations and refractory shock. According to the world health
organization dengue haemorrhagic fever is based on fever, thrombocytopenia and evidence of plasma leakage. Plasma leakage is confirmed in
the presence of hemoconcentration (haematocrit rises 20% higher than the baseline) or any clinical evidence of bleeding. Atypical
manifestations in dengue are less recognized especially in a dengue epidemic situations . Neurological involvement is one such example.
Various neurological manifestations have been reported in literature . These include encephalopathy, encephalitis, meningitis, myelitis,
Guillain–Barre syndrome, myositis, optic neuritis to name a few. A typical neurological manifestations of dengue, particularly in pregnancy
lacks a distinctive clinical picture and leads to diagnostic difficulties and poses a challenge to both the clinician and obstetrician. A
high index of suspicion is mandatory in such clinical scenarios. We report a rare occurrence of a reversible dengue encephalopathy in a term
mother with uneventful recovery. A 28 year old woman, 37 weeks of pregnancy presented with fever of four days duration to the casualty
medical ward. The following day she appeared to be irritable, somnolent, aggressive and thereafter followed by unresponsiveness to commands.
On examination she was febrile, anicteric and not pale. She was confused, poorly responsive and her GCS was 9 (eyeopening = 2, verbal
response = 2, motor response = 5). Respiratory, cardiovascular and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. There was no neck stiffness,
Kernigs and Brudzinki signs were negative. Cranial nerves were intact. Pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs were absent. Dilated fundoscopy
did not reveal any papilledema. Her full blood count revealed an isolated thrombocytopenia. White cell count 9000 cells/cumm, Hemoglobin
10 g/dl, mean corpuscular volume 85 ft, Platelets 60,000 cells/mm, counts progressively dropping up until 8000 cells/cumm. Hematocrit was
stable at 33%. ESR was 20 mm/h and was CRP 4 mg/dL. LDH was <200 u/L. Blood picture revealed a thrombocytopenia in keeping with a possible
viral infection, there were no features of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. Urine analysis excluded proteinuria and hematuria. Hepatic
profile which was initially normal started to escalate. Aspartate aminotransferase 25 U/L up till 250 U/L (<40 U/L), alanine
aminotransferase 20 U/L up till 250 U/L (<40 U/L), alkaline phosphatase 300 U/L (30–300 U/L) and serum bilirubin 0.7 mg/dL respectively,
revealing an anicteric hepatitis which is a common finding in dengue infection. Renal functions and serum electrolytes were normal. Clotting
profile was PT 10S, APTT 38S, INR 1.2 and FDP < 0.2 u/L, excluding the possibility of disseminated intravascular coagulation. Ultrasound
scan did not reveal any pleural effusions or ascites excluding the early signs of capillary vascular leakage. Dengue non structural
protein-1(NS) antigen was positive at day 4 of the illness. Dengue IgM antibodies were high in titre by day 6. Due to deterioration of
clinical status she was transferred to intensive care unit for closer observation. An electroencephalography revealed bilateral rhythmic
delta wave activity consistent with a diffuse cerebral dysfunction. CSF analysis was not performed due to profound thrombocytopenia, thus
making it difficult for us to exclude other encephalitic pathogens as a cause for the encephalopathy. Nevertheless since serology was
strongly positive for dengue infection and with the present dengue epidemic in our country we strongly suspected dengue encephalopathy as
our first differential diagnosis. A CT scan of head was not performed due to possible risk of radiation to the fetus and the patients
relatives refused consent for any imaging modalities. She was monitored closely, careful fluid management according to guidelines were
carried out with regular fetal monitoring and bleeding precautions were undertaken. With the gradual rise in platelets, the patients
neurological status improved spontaneously by day 10 of the illness. The encephalopathy had lasted approximately for 6 days. Fortunately,
she did not have any clinical evidence of increased vascular permeability suggestive of dengue hemorrhagic fever or go into dengue shock
syndrome. Once the platelet reached 70,000/mm3, she was induced for labour and delivered vaginally the baby without any peripartum or
postpartum complications. Neurological manifestations are uncommon in dengue infection. Encephalopathy is an unusual neurological
complication of dengue fever. Its incidence ranges between 0.5 and 6%. Several studies report that DEN-2 and DEN-3 have the highest
predisposition to neurological complications. The possible pathogenesis being described in literature include hepatic encephalopathy,
cerebral hypoperfusion in dengue shock syndrome, cerebral edema due to increased vascular permeability, deranged electrolytes, and
intracranial bleeding due to thrombocytopenia or coagulopathy . The infection causes activation of cytokines and complements which result in
endothelial dysfunction, platelet dysfunction and consumptive coagulopathy. Dengue virus was primarily thought to be a non-neurotropic virus
. However, recent studies reveal the direct neuronal infiltration by the virus and the possible neurotropism leading to dengue
encephalopathy and encephalitis. There are reports of demonstration of dengue virus and IgM antibody in the CSF of very few patients with
encephalopathy/encephalitis [8, 9]. Virus or antibody can be isolated from the serum nevertheless CSF samples may be negative. In the case
of our patient, we were unable to confirm the direct neuronal invasion with a CSF study due to profound thrombocytopenia, a strong limiting
factor in confirming the diagnosis. Brain imaging modalities have shown a bilateral thalamic predisposition in dengue encephalitis . However
MRI findings in dengue fever have not been very clearly explained due to the paucity of the condition. Interestingly, Japanese encephalitis
virus which closely resemble dengue virus characteristically produces bilateral thalamic involvement, hence being an important differential
in the workup of the diagnosis and can be confirmed by a CSF study. Though initially there was uncertainty about dengue encephalitis as an
entity, it is established that dengue virus has neuroinvasive potential. The international encephalitis consortium has recognized this as an
emerging area of encephalitis . The diagnosis and management of dengue fever in pregnancy is a challenge to the clinician and the
obstetrician. The physiological changes in pregnancy, pregnancy related complications and medical disorders must be kept in mind before
interpreting the laboratory values. The entities in pregnancy that resemble dengue fever and need to be excluded include Idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) complicated with an intracranial haemorrhage, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with cerebral vasculitis,
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APLS) with CNS complications and pregnancy related complications such as pre-eclampsia, hemolysis,
elevated liver enzymes and low platelets (HELLP), thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), sepsis and disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC). The normal hematocrit levels in pregnancy may be as low as 33% (non pregnant female hematocrit is about 38%) . As there
is a physiological increase in the intravascular volume in the third trimester, the identification of plasma leakage syndrome through
hemoconcentration or hypoproteinemia may be compromised which may under estimate the proportion of dengue haemorrhagic fever in pregnant
women. There is increased risk of hemorrhage (maternal and fetal), pre eclampsia, miscarriages, fetal anomalies, low birth weight, premature
births, increased rate of cesarean sections, increased maternal and fetal mortality and a risk of vertical transmission of dengue infection
in pregnancy [13, 14]. Our patient is the first reported pregnant mother to suffer from dengue encephalopathy in the Indian subcontinent.
Interestingly, the transient neurological deterioration spontaneously improved with the rise in platelet counts. This also raises the
question of whether an immuno tolerant state such as pregnancy predisposes more to dengue encephalopathy/encephalitis. In our patient, the
suspicion of dengue encephalopathy was crucial for optimum monitoring and management to prevent adverse outcomes to both mother and fetus,
although we were unable to confirm it with a CSF study. The current WHO guidelines do not elaborate on the clinical and hematological
monitoring and fluid management of dengue infection in term pregnancy. More evidence based and multidisciplinary based studies are strongly
and urgently indicated to decide on the diagnosis, value of CSF study, optimal fluid management with regard to dengue encephalopathy in a
term pregnancy. The guidelines to determine the precise timing and mode of delivery for term mothers suffering dengue infection are
essential to facilitate management and to prevent adverse outcomes. Dengue encephalopathy is a rare phenomenon complicating term pregnancy.
This paper emphasizes on the hurdles of diagnosis and management of dengue fever in a term pregnancy, which definitely needs special
attention. Further case reports and studies are mandatory to evaluate the exact magnitude and outcome of this clinical scenario as evidence-
based data in the pathogenesis, diagnosis and the management of dengue encephalopathy in pregnancy is sparse. erythrocyte sedimentation rate
C reactive protein computed tomography Glasgow coma scale lactate dehydrogenase cerebrospinal fluid analysis prothrombin time activated
partial thromboplastin time international normalized ratio fibrinogen degradation products magnetic resonance imaging All authors have read
and approved the final manuscript. LR has taken care of inward management of and monitoring the patient while in febrile phase of dengue
fever and drafting the manuscript. RLS providing intellectual support in interpreting clinical and investigation results and manuscript
revision. MK supervised the obstetric management of the patient including regular fetal monitoring and timing of delivery. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript. Authors would like to acknowledge the dedicated nursing staff of ward 6, ICU staff, and the obstetric
team, Sri Jayewardenepura General Hospital. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All data generated during this case
report are included in this published article [and its supplementary information files]. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor
of this journal. CARE guidelines and methodology were adhered to.
