Subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts have been described rarely, particularly among adolescents. Only a few reports have described the
ultrasonographic features of bronchogenic cysts, characterizing them as nonspecific cystic masses with or without internal echogenic foci or
debris. Therefore, it is hard to differentiate subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts from other subcutaneous cystic tumors ultrasonographically.
We report a case of presternal subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst in an 18-year-old man with unusual ultrasonographic findings. Ultrasonography
revealed a small, oval, cystic mass containing a well-circumscribed, heterogeneously hypoechoic, egg-shaped lesion in the dependent portion
of the mass within the subcutaneous fat layer overlying the sternum. Surgical excision was performed, and the cystic mass was diagnosed as a
bronchogenic cyst. On pathological examination, the internal, heterogeneously hypoechoic, ball-like lesion was found to be mucous material
within the cyst. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of a presternal subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst presenting with a ball-
like lesion inside of the cyst. This unusual ultrasonographic feature can be a clue to the diagnosis of subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst. In
conclusion, if an anechoic cyst containing an internal, well-circumscribed, hypoechoic ball-like lesion is seen in the presternal
subcutaneous fat layer, subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst should be considered in the differential diagnosis of subcutaneous cystic masses.
Bronchogenic cysts are a congenital pulmonary anomaly resulting from abnormal budding of the tracheobronchial tree during embryological
development. The majority of bronchogenic cysts are typically found in the thorax, mediastinum, or pulmonary parenchyma ; only rarely have
subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts also been described. The most common location of a subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst is the suprasternal area,
followed by the presternal area, the neck, the scapular areas, and the abdominal wall. In evaluating a cystic mass in these areas,
ultrasonography can be a useful initial modality because of the superficial location of subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts. However, only a few
authors have reported the ultrasonographic features of a cutaneous or subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst, manifest as a nonspecific cystic mass.
Owing to this lack of specific ultrasonographic findings, it is hard to differentiate subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts from other
subcutaneous cystic masses, such as epidermoid inclusion cysts. In this case report, we describe a man with a presternal subcutaneous
bronchogenic cyst in whom the unusual ultrasonographic findings correlated with the pathologic findings to provide a differential diagnostic
point for subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst. A 18-year-old man presented with a history of a palpable lump in the presternal area, which was
found incidentally after weight reduction. The patient had no other relevant medical or trauma history. On physical examination, the lesion
was found to be a nonmovable, firm mass with no tenderness or associated skin changes, detected at the midline position over the sternum (at
the manubrium level). There was no visible fistulous opening or discharge from the lesion. On ultrasonography, we detected a well-
circumscribed, oval, anechoic mass, with posterior acoustic enhancement, that measured about 3.3 × 1.7 × 3.1 cm, and was located in the
subcutaneous fat layer over the sternum. In the dependent portion of the mass was an internal, well-circumscribed, heterogeneously
hypoechoic, egg-shaped lesion (Fig. 1A and B) showing a movement according to patient movement. The mass could be compressed using the
linear transducer (Fig. 2A and B). A color Doppler study showed no vascularity within the cystic mass or the internal hypoechoic lesion
(Fig. 1C). Ultrasonographic findings of presternal subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst. The transverse view (A) and longitudinal view (B) show a
well-circumscribed, oval, anechoic mass (arrows) with posterior acoustic enhancement in the subcutaneous fat layer over the sternum. The
mass had an internal, well-circumscribed, heterogeneously hypoechoic, ball-like lesion (arrowheads) in the dependent portion of the mass. On
color Doppler study (C), no vascularity was evident in the cystic mass or in the internal hypoechoic lesion. Transverse views of
ultrasonography before (A) and after compression (B) of the presternal subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst. On compression using a linear
transducer, the anechoic mass was easily compressed (arrows); however, the internal ball-like lesion showed minimal compression. Surgical
excision of the mass was performed without postoperative complications. Grossly, the excised mass was a well-defined, ovoid, cystic mass
gray-tan in color. On section, it was found to be a unilocular cyst filled with whitish mucous material. Microscopically, the mass was lined
with ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium suggestive of respiratory type-mucosa (Fig. 3). There was nonspecific collagenous
fibrosis around the cyst. The differential diagnosis of subcutaneous cyst included epidermal inclusion cyst, thyroglossal duct cyst,
branchial cleft cyst, and dermoid cyst. There was no histological evidence of squamous epithelium, keratin, thyroid tissue, or skin
appendage in the cystic wall of the present case. The mass was diagnosed as a bronchogenic cyst. Histological features of a presternal
subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst. Microscopically, the mass was lined with ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium (arrows) suggestive
of respiratory-type mucosa (hematoxylin and eosin stain; magnification ×400). Bronchogenic cysts are abnormalities of pulmonary
differentiation derived from abnormal budding of the tracheobronchial tree during embryonic development. Abnormal budding of the
tracheobronchial tree results in the anomalies of bronchogenic cysts, pulmonary sequestration, and tracheal lobes. These anomalous buds may
migrate abnormally during embryological development and come to rest at intrathoracic or extrathoracic locations, such as the mediastinum
(the most common site); the pulmonary parenchyma; or the subcutaneous tissues of the suprasternal area, the neck, the scapular area, or the
abdominal wall. If the anomalous buds migrate to the subcutaneous tissue of the presternal area before complete fusion of the sternal bars,
the buds that differentiate into a fluid-filled, blind-ending pouch become presternal subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts, as in the case
described here. Clinically, subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts are found shortly after birth or in early childhood. Only a few cases of
subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts that were diagnosed in persons above the age of 18 have been reported in the English language literature.
These cysts are more common in boys, and they are asymptomatic, but may be related to symptoms such as draining sinuses and/or cyst
enlargement, tenderness, pruritus, and dysphagia. Bronchogenic cysts usually contain a mixture of water and proteinaceous mucus and range
from clear or yellowish watery liquid to viscous or mucous material. So, some subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts have a fistulous opening that
drains mucous materials. Microscopically, subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts are characteristically lined with ciliated, pseudostratified
columnar epithelial cells interspersed with goblet cells, suggesting respiratory epithelium. These cysts also show other components,
including smooth muscle fibers, mucous glands, and cartilage, which are present in 80%, 53%, and 7% of the cysts, respectively. These
histological findings lead to a differential diagnosis that includes cutaneous ciliated cyst, thyroglossal duct cyst, epidermal inclusion
cyst, branchial cleft cyst, dermoid cyst, and trichilemmal cyst. Although subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts are almost always benign, there
have been reports of malignant transformation or recurrence if excision of the cyst is not complete. Total excision is thus advised for the
treatment of subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts. The majority of bronchogenic cysts are typically located in the mediastinum and pulmonary
parenchyma. Therefore, the typical features of bronchogenic cysts detected on imaging have been reported and have been reviewed mostly for
intrathoracic bronchogenic cysts on computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), where they typically show a well-defined,
oval, or lobulated mass with thin, smooth walls. Homogeneous water or soft-tissue attenuation/signal intensity of bronchogenic cysts is
demonstrated without internal contrast enhancement, suggesting cystic content. Variability in attenuation or signal intensity can be seen
according to variations in cyst contents. On CT, hyperattenuation may occur with hemorrhage or calcification contained in the cyst. If
infection or communication with airways is present, bronchogenic cysts are seen as air-filled masses. Ultrasonographic features of
bronchogenic cysts have been described in only a few reports. McAdams et al reported the prenatal ultrasonographic findings in 2 cases of
intrathoracic bronchogenic cysts: in one case, a unilocular, anechoic cyst in the right lung, with posterior acoustic enhancement, and in
another, a multilocular cyst with dependent echogenic material in the right lung. Katsenos et al described the case of a patient with a
unilocular, oval, hypoechoic lesion with fine, homogeneous internal echogenicity in the mediastinum on endobronchial ultrasonography. In
cases of subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst, Park et al and Catte et al reported unilocular anechoic oval cysts with posterior acoustic
enhancement in the subcutaneous tissue over the sternum and in the neck, and Lee et al described a hypoechoic lesion with posterior acoustic
enhancement and internal echogenic foci in the subcutaneous layer of the lower neck. Wortsman et al described an oval, hypoechoic lesion
with anechoic band suggesting solid-cystic structure in the subcutaneous tissue of the sternal region. Similar to the features seen on CT
and MRI, bronchogenic cysts are usually well-circumscribed oval lesions, and show nonechogenicity or hypoechogenicity with or without
internal echogenic debris related to the variability in cyst content. On color Doppler study, no internal vascularity has been seen in any
cases. Although cases representing internal echogenic foci or dependent echogenic debris have been reported, an anechoic cyst with an
internal, well-circumscribed, movable, heterogeneously hypoechoic, ovoid lesion located in the dependent portion of the inside of the mass
has, to our knowledge, not been described previously as an ultrasonographic finding in subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst. On color Doppler
study, the internal, heterogeneously hypoechoic ball-like lesion showed no vascularity, which is not suggestive of a mural nodule. This
lesion might be caused by aggregated mucous material. Considering that our patient was older than the usual patients with subcutaneous
bronchogenic cysts, we think that the long-standing period without a sinus track may bring about the accumulation and aggregation of mucous
materials and the resultant hypoechoic ball-like lesion within the cyst on ultrasonography. The main differential diagnosis of subcutaneous
bronchogenic cysts includes epidermal inclusion cyst, thyroglossal duct cyst, branchial cleft cyst, and dermoid cyst. Subcutaneous epidermal
inclusion cysts are usually well-circumscribed, oval, mildly echogenic masses with occasional linear anechoic and/or echogenic reflections,
increased through-transmission, a hypoechoic rim, and no Doppler flow. Most thyroglossal duct cysts are located in the midline and at the
hyoid level or infrahyoid and are unilocular, with thin walls and posterior acoustic enhancement; however, their echogenicity ranges from
hypoechoic to a heterogeneous pattern, and they can have a thick wall and internal septa, suggesting the presence of inflammation. The
ultrasonographic appearance of branchial cleft cysts is variable and may be similar to that of thyroglossal duct cysts; however, most cases
of branchial cleft cysts can be differentiated from thyroglossal duct cysts on the basis of their characteristic lateral location in the
neck. Dermoid cysts are located around the hyoid bone and are echogenic owing to the presence of fat and osseodental structures.
Ultrasonography is commonly used as an initial evaluation modality for cysts because of their superficial location and predominance in young
patients. As mentioned previously, subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts are nonspecific cystic masses with or without internal echogenic foci or
debris on ultrasonography. Because they have ultrasonographic features similar to those of other cystic masses among the main differential
diagnoses, subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts have usually been mistaken for other subcutaneous cystic masses. However, the unusual
ultrasonographic appearance described in this report, which has not been seen in these other types of cystic masses, can be a diagnostic
clue for subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst. In conclusion, subcutaneous bronchogenic cysts are uncommon lesions, especially in adolescence.
However, if an anechoic cyst with an internal, well-circumscribed, hypoechoic ball-like lesion is seen within the presternal subcutaneous
fat layer, subcutaneous bronchogenic cyst should be considered in the differential diagnosis of subcutaneous cystic masses. Abbreviations:
CT = computed tomography, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging. Institutional review board approval in our hospital was granted and informed
consent was waived for this retrospective case report. The authors report no conflicts of interest.
