Hand-foot syndrome is a common cutaneous adverse effect associated with certain systemic chemotherapy drugs. It is characterized by
erythema, edema, and burning sensation, especially over palmoplantar surfaces. We report the case of an elderly patient undergoing
chemotherapy after a breast cancer surgery who developed symptoms two months after the start of the regimen. There are no studies that
explore specific therapies. Suggestive therapy include reducing agent dosage, increasing the interval between cycles, or even stopping
chemotherapy. Emollients, analgesics, and cold packs are described as effective. After alopecia and mucositis, hand-foot syndrome is the
most common adverse dermatologic reaction to chemotherapeutic agents. We report a 73-year-old woman under post-surgical chemotherapy (breast
ductal carcinoma) who presented with transudation and pain on the lower limbs 20 days after the first cycle with doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide and no improvement with furosemide. Due to treatment failure after four cycles of adjuvant regimen, the patient was started
on herceptin and paclitaxel. From the 45th day of this new regimen, we observed the development of an edema and considerable erythema on the
hands, wrists, legs, and feet. We also observed desquamation, ulceration, vesicopustules, and intense burning sensation. Little improvement
was observed after analgesia, topical corticosteroids and cephalexin (Figures 1 and 2). Figure 1 Erythema and acral edema on the lower
limbs, with flaking and areas of ulceration Erythema and acral edema on the lower limbs, with flaking and areas of ulceration Figure 2
Detail of scaly erythematous lesions of the posterior region of the ankles with areas of ulceration and vesicopustules Detail of scaly
erythematous lesions of the posterior region of the ankles with areas of ulceration and vesicopustules Laboratory tests were normal.
Histopathological examination showed areas of epidermal necrosis with small clefts, keratinocyte apoptosis, parakeratosis foci, and basal
vacuolar degeneration with extensive involvement of the acrosyringium without squamous syringometaplasia. We opted for hospitalization,
suspension of chemotherapy, and administration of opioids, prednisone (0.5 mg/kg), potassium permanganate compresses, and application of
occlusive dressing with fludroxycortide. The patient was discharged five days later with significant improvement in pain and lesions. Hand-
foot syndrome (HFS) - or palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia, acral erythema, or Burgdorf reaction - is an adverse event of many
chemotherapeutic agents, especially liposomal doxorubicin, capecitabine, 5-fluorouracil, cytarabine, docetaxel, sorafenib, sunitinib,
cyclophosphamide, etoposide, vinorelbine, methotrexate, hydroxyurea, tegafur, mercaptopurine, and paclitaxel.1,2 After alopecia and
mucositis, HFS is the most common adverse dermatologic reaction to chemotherapy, with an incidence of 3%-64%. The highest incidences occur
with doxorubicin (40%-50%) and capecitabine (50%-60%). The risk of HFS seems to be dose-dependent: formulations that prolong the serum level
or that concentrate the drug at the affected sites have the highest association rates.1 The pathogenesis of HFS is not known. It is believed
to be a toxic reaction due to the local accumulation of the drug with consequent degeneration and necrosis of the sweat glands. That is
because its microscopic features resemble squamous eccrine syringometaplasia and neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis patterns.2,3 HFS presents
with prodromal dysesthesia and palmar-plantar tingling. Within days, the reaction progresses to burning pain, well-defined edema and
erythema with a tendency to symmetry and flaking, and limitation of daily activities. Extreme cases involve ulceration and blisters,
palmoplantar keratoderma, nail dystrophy, inflammation of actinic keratoses, and may affect the folds of the skin (axillary, inguinal,
perineal, and inframammary).1,2,4-6 Different classifications grade the severity of HFS. The two most commonly used criteria are provided by
the World Health Organization and by the National Cancer Institute (Chart 1).7 Clinical description of severity for hand-foot syndrome
according to NCI-CTCAE (National Cancer Institute - Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events) and WHO (World Health Organization) and
associated histologic findings There are no longitudinal studies that explore specific treatments. Suggestive therapy include reducing
chemotherapy dosage, increasing the interval between cycles, or even stopping chemotherapy, which would lead to remission of the picture in
up to two weeks. Dressings, rigorous analgesia, emollients, cold compresses, and potent topical corticosteroids associated with emollients
or systemic corticosteroids are reported as efficient. Cooling of the hands and feet and use of emollients and antiperspirants (aluminum
chloride hydroxide) during infusions can prevent the reaction. Oral pyridoxine showed no preventive efficacy in HFS.2,8-10 With an aging
population and greater access to health care and oncological diagnosis, cutaneous reactions to chemotherapy should become more frequent.
Prevention, identification, and early intervention is essential for clinicians in cases of HFS. Conflict of Interest: None Financial
Support: None Study conducted at the Department of Dermatology and Radiotherapy, Medical School of Botucatu - Universidade Estadual Paulista
"JÃºlio de Mesquita Filho" (Unesp) - Botucatu (SP), Brazil
