Pyoderma gangrenosum is a rare neutrophilic dermatosis, which usually presents as ulcers with erythematous-violaceous undermined edges and a
rough base with purulent or sanguinous exudate. It can be primary or associated with an underlying disease. However, rare cases of its
association with autoimmune hepatitis have been described in the literature. Diagnosis is based on a characteristic clinical picture and
ruling out other causes of ulcers. This paper aims to discuss the management of corticosteroid therapy and the importance of local
treatment. We report a case with torpid evolution, presented with multiple and deep ulcers in a young patient with autoimmune hepatitis,
causing pain and significant disability. We observed complete healing of lesions after two months of successful treatment. Pyoderma
gangrenosum (PG) is a rare neutrophilic dermatosis, with an estimated annual incidence of 3-10 cases per million in the population.1 It can
present itself as a primary disorder or be associated with an underlying disease, particularly inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), arthritis,
hematologic diseases, and malignant diseases.2 Typical clinical presentation consists of a pustule or nodule that evolves into a painful
ulcer with an undermined and well-defined erythematous-violaceous border. The base of the ulcer commonly has granulation tissue with
purulent or sanguinous exudate. It is usually located on lower limbs and displays centrifugal growth. Other possible forms of presentation
include vegetative, bullous, and pustular types. Its frequent association with autoimmune diseases and pathergy corroborate the hypothesis
of PG as an autoimmune disease.3 Pathergy, which occurs in about 30% of cases, consists of the appearance of new lesions or the worsening of
pre-existing lesions after a local trauma.4 The diagnosis is made - in addition to its compatible clinical characteristics - by excluding
other causes of similar-appearing cutaneous ulcerations - including infection, malignancy, and vasculitis - by histopathological examination
and laboratory study. The treatment of secondary PG should consider the treatment of the underlying disease. In primary PG, corticosteroid
therapy is the gold standard, sometimes in combination with immunosuppressant therapy.5 This paper aims to discuss an exuberant case of PG
in a young patient with autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), emphasizing corticosteroid therapy management and the importance of local treatment. We
report a 25-year-old female patient with recurrent ulcers on the lower limbs for the past four years. She reported onset with pustules,
which progressed to ulceration in the left medial malleolus region. Later, she noticed other similar ulcers on both lower limbs, with
disabling local pain. As a relevant medical record, she had type 1 AIH. She was on prednisone (20 mg daily) and azathioprine (100 mg daily)
- precribed for AIH - and clobetasol cream 0.05%. Physical examination revealed a deep ulcerated lesion on the lateral side of the right
lower limb (RLL), about 5 cm in diameter, reaching the subcutaneous tissue, with violaceous regular and undermined edges, and base with
purulent exudate and granulation tissue. We also observed two other ulcerated lesions on the lateral side of the RLL and an ulcer on the
medial side of the RLL with similar characteristics (Figure 1). Similar ulcers were observed in the anterior aspect of the left lower limb
(LLL) and the medial aspect of the LLL - the latter particularly deep, with maceration on the edges and smaller adjacent ulceration. A total
of seven ulcers were observed (Figure 2). Figure 1 Right lower limb: aspect before treatment. Three deep ulcers on the lateral aspect and an
ulcer in the medial region of the limb reaching the subcutaneous tissue, with violaceous regular and undermined edges Right lower limb:
aspect before treatment. Three deep ulcers on the lateral aspect and an ulcer in the medial region of the limb reaching the subcutaneous
tissue, with violaceous regular and undermined edges Figure 2 Left lower limb: aspect before treatment. On the left, deep ulcer with
violaceous irregular and macerated edges in left medial malleolus region, with smaller adjacent ulceration. On the right, ulcer on the
anteromedial aspect of the limb. We also observed atrophic scars caused by previous ulcers. Left lower limb: aspect before treatment. On the
left, deep ulcer with violaceous irregular and macerated edges in left medial malleolus region, with smaller adjacent ulceration. On the
right, ulcer on the anteromedial aspect of the limb. We also observed atrophic scars caused by previous ulcers. Histopathological study of a
lesion revealed unspecific, ulcerated, and chronic inflammation process (Figures 3 and 4). The search for mycobacteria, fungi, and
sporotrichosis serology were negative. PCR for leishmaniasis and leishmanin skin test were also negative. Laboratory tests revealed elevated
C-reactive protein, glucose intolerance, and normal liver laboratory tests, except for the elevation of gamma-glutamyltransferase. Figure 3
Histopathology. Ulcerated area with granulation tissue, recent hemorrhage, perivascular mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate and fibrosis
(Hematoxylin & eosin x40) Histopathology. Ulcerated area with granulation tissue, recent hemorrhage, perivascular mononuclear inflammatory
infiltrate and fibrosis (Hematoxylin & eosin x40) Figure 4 Histopathology. Histological detail showing inflammatory infiltrate composed of
lymphocytes arranged around vessels (Hematoxylin & eosin x100) Histopathology. Histological detail showing inflammatory infiltrate composed
of lymphocytes arranged around vessels (Hematoxylin & eosin x100) We started treatment with prednisone at a dose of 70 mg/daily (1
mg/kg/day). In the first week, we used dressings with silver sulfadiazine 1% on the lesions. From the second week, we used dressings with
carboxymethyl cellulose 3% gel and Nystatin ointment with zinc oxide - the latter only on the macerated edge of the ulcer in the left medial
malleolus region (candidiasis associated). We recommended resting and keeping the lower limbs elevated. The patient was discharged after 18
days of hospitalization, with the prescription of prednisone (60 mg/daily) and daily dressings as described above, as well as guidance to
rest and elevate the lower limbs. Initially, we programmed the reduction of Prednisone by 10 mg per month. The patient returned a month
after discharge showing healing process in the ulcers (Figure 5). Two months after discharge, the seven ulcers were completely resolved with
use of prednisone 40 mg/daily. Three months after discharge, we still observed the complete healing of ulcers with prednisone 30 mg/daily
and emollient. At the time, we reduced the prednisone dose to 20 mg/daily and kept emollient topical care (Figure 6). Figure 5 One month
after the initiation of treatment. Healing ulcers on the right (A) and left (B) lower limbs. Re-epithelialization occurs from the edges of
the lesion One month after the initiation of treatment. Healing ulcers on the right (A) and left (B) lower limbs. Re-epithelialization
occurs from the edges of the lesion Figure 6 Three months after initiation of treatment. Complete healing of ulcers on the lateral aspect of
the right lower limb Three months after initiation of treatment. Complete healing of ulcers on the lateral aspect of the right lower limb
Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is a rare dermatosis, and its association with autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) was rarely described in the literature.
We report a case with torpid evolution, presenting with multiple and deep ulcers in a young patient with autoimmune hepatitis, causing pain
and significant disability. Although the patient was treated with prednisone and azathioprine - both prescribed for AIH - the lesions showed
no clinical improvement. In the present case, PG and the underlying disease did not follow parallel clinical courses, since AIH was
inactive. It is known that the course of the PG can be parallel or not parallel in cases associated with underlying IBD.6 The systemic
corticosteroid therapy is the treatment of choice for PG. High initial doses are often necessary, such as prednisone 60-80 mg/daily.7 In the
present case, we initially prescribed prednisone 1 mg/kg/daily, an equivalent to 70 mg/daily. There are reports on the successful use of
azathioprine for PG treatment, but they still require further scientific evidence.8 We believe that the importance given to local treatment
was essential for the healing of the lesions. In this particular case, we applied silver sulfadiazine topical 1%, given the large amount of
purulent exudate. Although it may be sterile in PG, we suspected secondary infection, considering the recent worsening of the lesion and the
increased pain reported by the patient. Then we used carboxymethyl cellulose gel 3%, one of the components of the hydrogel dressing, which
has healing properties by aiding cell rehydration and autolytic debridement.9 Because of the high cost of commercial hydrogel dressing, we
chose to use isolated carboxymethyl cellulose. We further emphasize the slow withdrawal of corticosteroid therapy: after 17 days using 1
mg/kg/daily, given the evolutionary improvement observed, we started to reduce by 10 mg every month; after 30 mg/daily, we reduced 10 mg
every 15 days. We highlight the surprisingly satisfactory response to treatment, with complete healing of the lesions within two months.
Currently, the patient is on prednisone 20 mg/daily without remission. However, long-term follow up is necessary, given the variable course
of PG.10 Conflict of Interest: None. Work performed at Hospital Universit√°rio Clementino Fraga Filho - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
Financial Support: None
