Nevus spilus is a melanocytic cutaneous lesion consisting of a light brown background macule with numerous superimposed darker maculopapular
speckles. Melanoma arising from a nevus spilus is rare, with less than 40 cases reported to date. The absolute risk for malignant
transformation is not well defined, lacking a standardized management approach. We report a new case of melanoma arising from nevus spilus,
with the additional peculiarity of multifocality. We offer our recommendations for the management of the condition. Nevus spilus (NS) is a
relatively uncommon skin lesion found in 0.2%-2.3% of the general population. It is characterized by darkly pigmented macules and papules
with background hyperpigmentation.1-5 Despite the reports of melanoma arising within NS, the malignant potential of this entity remains
unclear.1 We report the case of a patient who presented with synchronous melanomas arising from NS. An 83-year-old Caucasian male was
referred to our department for evaluation of a recent change in a pre-existing NS on his right upper extremity. The patient reported that
the lesion was present since birth and had showed no significant changes until a year before, when he noticed three darker areas showing
continuous growth. He had skin phototype III and a history of significant intermittent sun exposure during childhood and early adulthood. He
reported no personal or family history of melanoma or dysplastic nevi. Examination revealed a 27 cm x 10 cm light tan patch with speckled
lentiginous pigmentation involving the external aspect of his right arm and forearm (Figure 1). Three separate areas were observed within
this larger lesion with a varied darker pigmentation and irregular borders: two maculopapules measuring 23 x 23 mm (lesion A) and 15 x 22 mm
(lesion B), and one macule measuring 20 x 23 mm (lesion C) (Figure 2). In addition, a 15 x 13 mm irregularly pigmented macule was observed
on his upper back (lesion D) (Figure 2). Dermatoscopic examination of the four suspicious lesions was highly suggestive of malignant
melanoma (Figure 3). No palpable lymphadenopathy was present. Figure 1 Clinical picture showing the complete feature of NS, involving the
external aspect of the right arm and forearm of the patient. Three foci of newly formed, irregular dark areas can be seen (lesions A, B, and
C) Clinical picture showing the complete feature of NS, involving the external aspect of the right arm and forearm of the patient. Three
foci of newly formed, irregular dark areas can be seen (lesions A, B, and C) Figure 2 Closer view of the lesions A, B, C and the irregular
patch on the upper back of the patient (lesion D) Closer view of the lesions A, B, C and the irregular patch on the upper back of the
patient (lesion D) Figure 3 Dermoscopy of the suspected lesions revealed blue-grey veils, structureless areas, and irregular pigment network
with black dots and globules Dermoscopy of the suspected lesions revealed blue-grey veils, structureless areas, and irregular pigment
network with black dots and globules A punch biopsy was performed in lesion A, and histopathological analysis revealed superficial spreading
melanoma with a Breslow thickness of 1.15 mm. The patient subsequently underwent wide excisions of each suspicious lesion with a 1-cm margin
and sentinel lymph node biopsy. On final pathology, lesions A and B were superficial spreading melanomas, with Breslow thicknesses 2.51 mm
and 1.18 mm, respectively; lesions C and D were in situ malignant melanoma (Figure 4). In all cases, ulceration and satellite nodules were
absent, lymphovascular or perineural invasion were not seen, and the margins were negative. The intervening epidermis between the neoplastic
foci was consistent with a background NS lesion (Figure 5). The sentinel lymph node biopsy, as well as computed tomographic scan, showed no
evidence of metastatic disease. It was decided not to pursue additional therapy, and the residual NS lesion is being followed up closely by
the Department of Dermatology. Figure 4 Histopathologic examination revealed that lesions A and B were invasive superficial spreading
melanomas, forming multiple irregular nests and sheets in the dermis (A_Hematoxylin & eosin, x100, B_Hematoxylin & eosin, x40). Histology of
lesions C and D showed the characteristics of in situ malignant melanoma (Hematoxylin & eosin x100), with marked proliferation of atypical
melanocytes along the dermal-epidermal junction and superficial inflammatory infiltration of the dermis Histopathologic examination revealed
that lesions A and B were invasive superficial spreading melanomas, forming multiple irregular nests and sheets in the dermis (A_Hematoxylin
& eosin, x100, B_Hematoxylin & eosin, x40). Histology of lesions C and D showed the characteristics of in situ malignant melanoma
(Hematoxylin & eosin x100), with marked proliferation of atypical melanocytes along the dermal-epidermal junction and superficial
inflammatory infiltration of the dermis Figure 5 Histopathology of the nevus spilus showing mild acanthosis, elongation of rete ridges, and
lentiginous proliferation of basal melanocytes at the dermoepidermal junction with hyperpigmentation of basal keratinocytes (Hematoxylin &
eosin x200) Histopathology of the nevus spilus showing mild acanthosis, elongation of rete ridges, and lentiginous proliferation of basal
melanocytes at the dermoepidermal junction with hyperpigmentation of basal keratinocytes (Hematoxylin & eosin x200) NS, also known as nevus
on nevus, spotty nevus, spot on spot, or speckled lentiginous nevus, is a clinicopathologic entity characterized by a light tan-to-brown
background macule speckled with varying numbers of smaller, darker macules or papules.1-6 NS lesions occur fairly equally in men and women
and within different races; they may be present at birth or have its onset in childhood, or even after the age of 20 years.3-4,6 Clinically,
NS generally consists of a single non-hairy lesion, with a medium size of 4.3 cm (± 3.5 cm).4,6 Spotting within the lesion is more often
macular than papular, sized 1-3 mm, and develop during a period of months to years.2,6 NS can be divided into macular and papular variants,
and further into three different size groups: small (<1.5 cm); medium (1.5-19.9 cm); and giant (>20 cm).2-4,6 Less frequent
segmental/zosteriform NS has also been described.2-4,6 Lesions can be found anywhere on the body, but involve especially the trunk and
extremities.2-4,6 On histology, the background pigmented lesion of NS usually corresponds to a lentigo simplex or a café au lait macule,
while the dark speckles show features of a variety of nevi: junctional, compound, intradermal, dysplastic, Spitz, blue, neurotized nevus, or
ink spot lentigo.2-4,6 For a long time, NS was believed to be a harmless pigmented lesion. However, in 1957 Perkinson reported a melanoma
appearing on NS for the first time.2,4,6,7 Since then, less than 40 cases of melanoma developing within this entity have been published,
sometimes with a fatal outcome.1-10 Reviewing the published literature, most cases of malignant transformation were found in Caucasian or
black patients, more frequently on the trunk (64%) than the limbs (36%), with a female-male ratio of 56:44 and a mean age of 49 years.1,2,6
Melanoma on NS was usually one neoplasm, but multiple melanomas were observed within the same NS in three previous cases.5,6,8 The melanoma
most found was superficial spreading melanoma (68%), followed by nodular (16%) and in situ melanoma (16%)2,6. In 60% of cases, melanoma
developed on small or medium-sized NS, 24% on zosteriform NS, and 16% on giant NS.2,6 In 52% of cases, NS was present at birth; in 33%, it
was acquired during infancy; and in 14%, it appeared later.8 The exact risk for malignant degeneration within NS remains unknown1,4, but it
is thought to vary from 0.13%-0.2%2,6. An increased risk seems to exist when the NS is congenital or acquired in infancy, of macular type,
and larger than 4 cm (especially giant and zosteriform variants).2,4,6,8 Once a melanoma develops, it has a similar prognosis and management
as compared with other melanomas.6 There is no standardized management approach for NS. Overall, patients should be advised to perform self-
examination to monitor for any changes in their nevi and have a structured longterm follow-up with the help of sequential digital
dermatoscopy and, if available, reflectance confocal microscopy.1,4,5,6,9,10 This strategy, coupled with judicious use of biopsy for
suspicious areas, seems to assist in the early detection of melanoma.1,5,10 Prophylactic NS excision without pathologic confirmation of
dysplasia or malignancy is not supported by the available literature.1,2 In the setting of dysplasia or malignant melanoma, complete NS
excision is reasonable, size permitting, in order to eliminate the "faulty background" and to search for any multifocal melanomas.1,2 NS is
an entity that requires further study, in order to clarify its biologic behavior and allow future development of standardized management
guidelines. To the best of our knowledge, this is the fourth report in the literature of synchronous melanomas arising within NS. Conflict
of Interest: None Financial Support: None Work performed at the Department of Dermatology, Instituto Português de Oncologia de Lisboa -
Lisboa, Portugal.
