Trichotillomania is a psychodermatologic disorder characterized by uncontrollable urge to pull one's own hair. Differential diagnoses
include the most common forms of alopecia such as alopecia areata. It is usually associated with depression and obsessive-compulsive
disorder. Trichotillomania treatment standardization is a gap in the medical literature. Recent studies demonstrated the efficacy of
N-acetylcysteine (a glutamate modulator) for the treatment of the disease. We report the clinical case of a 12-year-old female patient who
received the initial diagnosis of alopecia areata, but presented with clinical and dermoscopic features of trichotillomania. She was treated
with the combination of psychotropic drugs and N-acetylcysteine with good clinical response. Due to the chronic and recurring nature of
trichotillomania, more studies need to be conducted for the establishment of a formal treatment algorithm. Trichotillomania (TTM) is
characterized - according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM IV) - by persistent hair pulling behavior,
resulting in noticeable hair loss. Patients report feeling anxious before pulling their hair out and pleasure, satisfaction, or relief after
doing it. The disturbance is not accounted for by another mental disorder and is not due to a general medical condition. It causes
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.1 Clinical studies suggest that the
prevalence of TTM varies from 0.6% to 3% and is more common in female patients.2 Differential diagnoses include more common alopecias such
as alopecia areata (AA). TTM may be associated with depression, bipolar disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder.2,3 These associations,
combined with the poor knowledge regarding the diagnosis and course of the disease, make treatment more difficult, which is still considered
a challenge by the lack of systematization in the literature. We report a case of TTM that was initially diagnosed as AA. Our goal is to
highlight the importance of clinical and dermatoscopic differential diagnosis between these two entities, as well as to exemplify our TTM
patient's good response to treatment. A 12-year-old female patient, accompanied by her mother, reported hair loss for the past six months
after a family conflict. She had been previously diagnosed with AA and started topical treatment with minoxidil and clobetasol without
improvement. The mother noted that, when the patient was nervous, she had an uncontrollable urge to manipulate the scalp, which intensified
hair loss confirmed by the accumulation of hair around her. Dermatological examination revealed diffuse thinning with short, jagged, and
broken hairs, and negative tensile test (Figure 1). At dermoscopy, we noticed different hair lengths with broken shafts, vellus hair, V-sign
or ballerina baldness aspect, and numerous black spots. We observed no exclamation point hairs, nor yellow dots (Figure 2). The patient
refused to biopsy of the scalp. We established a clinical and dermatoscopic diagnosis of TTM and began treatment with doxepin (10 mg/daily),
fluoxetine (20 mg/daily), pimozide (2 mg/ daily), and N-acetylcysteine (600 mg/every 8 hours). In addition, the patient was referred for
psychological evaluation. She showed progressive improvement in the 6-month follow-up, with noticeable increase in capillary density and
improved TTM dermoscopy findings (Figures 3 and 4). Figure 1 In the first consultation, we observed diffuse and irregular hair thinning with
short hairs Figure In the first consultation, we observed diffuse and irregular hair thinning with short hairs Figure Figure 2 Dermoscopy
revealed broken hairs of different lengths, vellus hair (black arrow), V-sign or ballerina baldness aspect (red circle), and numerous black
dots (blue circle). Alopecia areata features – such as exclamation point hairs and yellow dots – were not observed Dermoscopy revealed
broken hairs of different lengths, vellus hair (black arrow), V-sign or ballerina baldness aspect (red circle), and numerous black dots
(blue circle). Alopecia areata features – such as exclamation point hairs and yellow dots – were not observed Figure 3 We observed
progressive improvement in the six months follow-up, with noticeable increase in capillary density. Compare figures A and B (before
treatment) to figures C and D (after sixth months of treatment) We observed progressive improvement in the six months follow-up, with
noticeable increase in capillary density. Compare figures A and B (before treatment) to figures C and D (after sixth months of treatment)
Figure 4 Dermoscopy showed an increase in capillary density, improvement of trichotillomania findings and hairs in the growth phase
Dermoscopy showed an increase in capillary density, improvement of trichotillomania findings and hairs in the growth phase TTM was first
described in 1889 by Hallopeau. It is currently ranked among the habit and impulse control disorders.2,3 Age at TTM onset varies from 9-13
years, and is more common in females, epidemiological characteristics consistent with our patient's. The main differential diagnosis of TTM
is AA, which affects the same gender and age group and sometimes have very similar clinical features. Classical pictures of AA reveal smooth
and shiny alopecia patches with ragged edges due to traction.4 TTM, in its turn, reveals multifocal and irregular alopecia patches formed by
multiple broken hairs with negative traction. Some reports, however, associate the two diseases, which poses a diagnostic challenge to
clinicians.5,6 In this scenario, dermoscopy has emerged as a noninvasive and useful tool in the diagnosis of the disease.4,7 Indicatives of
TTM findings include black dots, coiled hairs, shafts of various lengths, broom fibers, and V-sign (trichoptilosis). Exclamation point
hairs, which are suggestive of AA, are commonly absent.4 Therapy for TTM still lacks scientific evidence and is based on case reports.7-9
Some strategies used include psychotherapy, behavioral therapy, and drugs - such as lithium salts, tricyclic antidepressants (TADs),
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and antipsychotics. Recently, N-acetylcysteine has been proposed as an effective
alternative treatment3,9,10 since the drug restores the extracellular glutamate concentration in the nucleus accumbens (low levels of
extracellular glutamate concentration have been held responsible for the pathogenesis of compulsive behaviors, including the TTM).10 In a
randomized, double-blind clinical trial comparing N-acetylcysteine with placebo at doses ranging from 1.200 mg/daily to 2400 mg/daily, it
was observed that N-acetylcysteine was more effective and safer.10 It is noteworthy that, due to the chronic and relapsing nature of TTM,
more studies need to be conducted in order to establish a formal treatment algorithm. We conclude that differential diagnosis between AA and
MTA - two diseases affecting similar clinical profiles with potential stigmatising implications - is key to establish the correct
therapeutic approach for each of the conditions. Conflict of Interest: None Financial Support: None Study conducted at Instituto Lauro de
Souza Lima (ILSL) - Bauru (SP), Brazil.
