We present a 30-year-old male patient who was initially diagnosed as minimal change nephrotic syndrome. 5 years later, the patient developed
a localized form of idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis (IRF). An elevated ESR and concomitant nephrotic syndrome in the patient suggested
the immunologic nature of IRF. IRF has been reported in association with collagen diseases and rarely with proliferative and
nonproliferative glomerulopathies. To our knowledge, the association between minimal change lesion (MC) and IRF has not been reported.
Furthermore, the fact that IRF presented itself as an abdominal mass and lacked systemic symptoms was also unusual. Idiopathic
retroperitoneal fibrosis (IRF) is a disease characterized by a fibrotic process at the retroperitioneal area and around the aorta. The
fibrotic plaque entraps and gradually obstructs retroperitoneal structures such as the ureter, inferior vena cava and aorta. IRF is believed
to develop as a consequence of nonspecific inflammatory processes mediated by varying degrees of immune reaction. Associations between IRF
and immune mediated diseases have been reported. About 15% of IRF patients have fibrotic process in areas other than retroperitoneal space.
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), hypergammaglobulinema, autoimmune antibody, multiple vasculitis, pericardial or pleural
effusion are frequently found in IRF. Some links between IRF and renal disease, such as immune complex glomerulonephritis (GN), have also
been reported. However, IRF and concomitant minimal change nephrotic syndrome is a rare finding. We present a young male patient with
minimal change nephrotic syndrome who subsequently developed IRF 13 years later. Our IRF case is also unique in that the disease manifested
as a localized abdominal mass with few systemic symptoms. A 30-year-old man was admitted with a mass in the right upper quadrant (RUQ) of
the abdomen. 13 years ago, he had generalized edema and ascites. Nephrotic syndrome was diagnosed and prednisolone and diuretics were
prescribed. Even though his initial nephrotic syndrome had reached a complete remission, he had to take steroids intermittently because
edema usually relapsed with steroid tapering. Five years ago, percutaneous renal biopsy was performed. Under light microscopy, his renal
tissue showed no abnormal findings except slightly increased size in all 15 glomeruli (Fig. 1). Trace amount of mesangial IgM deposits were
found on immunofluorescent microscopic Examination and diffuse effacement of foot processes were noted by electron microscopy. Under the
impression of minimal change disease, the doctor advised the patient to take steroids as before. Eighteen months ago, he felt a mass in the
RUQ. The mass was not painful, but caused mild RUQ discomfort while growing in size. He was free from febrile sense, chill or other systemic
symptoms. He denied any past history of abdominal trauma or surgery of having taken any medications such as herb, ergot derivatives,
antihypertensives etc. On admission, he was a slightly obses man weighing 71kg. His blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, respiration rate was
20/min, and the body temperature was 36.5°C. A hard, fixed, palm-sized mass was palpated at the RUQ of the abdomen. Edema of a moderate
degree was observed at both lower extemities. Other physical findings were not significant. Laboratory data at the time of admission were
listed in Table 1. He had massive proteinuria (19.8g/day) and a low serum albumin concentration (1.8g/dl). His serum cholesterol level was
elevated to 382mg/dl. An elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (95mm/hr) and C-reactive proteins (2+) were also noted. Computed tomography
(CT) of the abdomen showed a huge 10cm-sized solid mass in front of and adjacent to the right kidney. The lobulated mass pushed the right
kindey upward. Precontrast CT scan showed that the mass had heterogenous attenuation and fine calcification in it. The post-contrast scan
revealed that the mass was a mixture of solid portions with high attenuation and necrotic portions with low attenuation. The outer margin of
the mass was discrete. No intra-abdominal lymph node enlargement was seen (Fig. 2). On intravenous urography, the right kidney was rotated
upward on the frontal plane but the shape and the excretory function were normal (Fig. 3). He was subjected to an exploratory laparotomy for
the definitive diagnosis of intra-abdominal mass. During laparotomy, we observed a well-encapsulated whitish solid mass with the dimensions
of 15×11×19cm below the right kidney in the retroperitoneal space. The right kidney was pushed upward and rotated horizontally by the mass.
In some part of the mass, the capsule was adhered to the posterior portion of the right kidney. The resected mass weighted 630g and its
surface was tabulated. Cross scetions showed cystic and mucoid degeneration in the fibrotic bundles (Fig. 4). No evidence of intra-abdominal
lymph node enlargement or other organ abnormality was observed. Seen through the light micorscope, most part of the tissue had dense
deposits of collagen fiber and fibroblast proliferation but, at the periphery of the mass, there were localized inflations of inflammatory
cells such as lymphocytes, plasma cells and histiocytes, forming germinal centers (Fig. 5). These findings were consistent with ‘idiopathic
retroperitoneal fibrosis (Ormond’s disease). After surgery, he was given 60mg of prednisolone q.d. for eight weeks. He reached remission at
the end of the 8th week, but the nephrotic syndrome relapsed one month after prednisolone tapered off. Cyclophosphamide was added and
currently he is maintaining a complete remission status for 20 months. Retroperitoneal fibrosis is considered idiopathic in 70% of the
cases, and the remaining 30% are attributed to various cause-medications (ergot derivatives, beta-blockers, methyl dopa), malignancy,
retroperitoneal infection, trauma and abdominal aortic aneurysm1). It has been suggested that IRF is an immune mediated disorder. Many IRF
cases have been reported in relationships to various immunologic phenomena. Que et al reported a case of IRF with Raynaud’s phenomenon,
pulmonary fibrosis and anti-nuclear antibody in the serum and implied that IRF is a local manifestation of systemic fibrosing processes2).
Lipman reported the case of a 29-year-old Negro woman with nephrotic syndrome and other characteristic features of systemic lupus
erythematosus who developed IRF five years later3). Kay described a case with retroperitoneal fibrosis and symptoms of arthralgia, stiffness
and pericardial friction rub and changes of rheumatoid spondylitis at autopsy4). Although not evidently seen in this presented patient,
about 15% of IRF cases are accompanied by fibrotic process in areas other than retroperitoneal space-i.e. mediastinal fibrosis, Riedel’s
fibrosing thyroiditis, sclerosing cholangitis, fibrotic orbital pseudotumors. These fibrosing lesions share definite pathological
similarities with one another. Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), hyperglobulinemia, autoimmune antibody (anti-thyroid antibody,
anti-nuclear antibody, positive Coomb’s test), multiple vasculitis, pericardial or pleural effusion, immune-complex mediated
glomerulonephritis5,6) are frequently seen in IRF, suggesting that IRF is a kind of connective tissue disorder and is a local manifestation
of systemic diseases of an immunologic etilolgy3,6,7). Association of IRF and renal disorder has been reported by a few authors. In a
retrospective study8), among 46 IRF patients 13 patients (28.2%) had albuminuria. Two IRF cases with clinically evident nephrotic syndrome
were also reported by Lipman3) and Liftman9). Renal biopsy findings of Lipman’s patient were compatible with lupus nephritis in which focal
proliferative lesions were intermingled with zones of fibrinoid necrosis3). Littman’s patient developed nephrotic syndrome 9 years after he
was diagnosed to have IRF, and later his disease proved to be a renal amyloidosis9). Katz et al5) reported a 26-year-old female IRF patient
whose renal tissue showed capillary and mesangial deposits of IgG and complements, which advocated a possibility of immune-complex mediated
chronic glomerulonephritis in IRF. Electron dense deposits in the glomerular basement membranes observed by Zabetakis in a patients with
crescentic GN and IRF also supports the possibility of immune-complex mecdiated GN in IRF6). To our knowledge, no reports have been found
about the association of minimal change nephrotic syndrome with IRF. Minimal change lesion is currently considered as a T cell mediated
disease. The presence of CD4+ lymphocytes in IRF10, 11) and clinical efficacy of corticosteroids12–15) when given before the dense fibrotic
stage, as well as a case reported by Kirschbaum et al7), who had IRF and interstitial nephritis, support the possible role of cell mediated
immunity in the pathogenesis of IRF. Therefore, it remains to be solved whether, as seen in our patient, minimal change nephrotic syndrome
is pathophysiologically related with or a casual finding of IRF. The second unique finding in this patient was that the presented patient
had few systemic manifestations. Patients with retroperitoneal fibrosis usually have nonspecific symptoms-noncolicky back or abdominal pain,
fatigue, weight loss and mild fever1,8). The symptoms and signs of the disease are closely associated with entrapment and mechanical
compression of the ureter, inferior vena cava, aorta and its branches and gonadal arteries. The ureter is the most commonly involved
structure. Ureteric obstruction by extrinsic compression progresses slowly and sometimes offers no symptoms. But, it casues flank pain and
tenderness, costovertebral angle tenderness, oliguria or anuria and finally renal failure. Compression of the inferior vena cava can cause
edema in both legs, the scrotum, and deep vein thrombophlebitis of the lower extremities. Eventually, compression of the aorta and common
iliac arteries brings claudication and gangrenous change1,8). Our patient did not have any of the symptoms mentioned above, partly becasue
IRF was localized to the RUQ with minimal compressive effects on the retroperitoneal structures, and partly becasue the steroids that he had
been taking masked systemic symptoms of IRF. IRF sometimes occurs in areas where there is a severe atherosclerotic change and weakened media
in the aortic wall. This is explained by the hypothesis that insoluble lipid (ceroid) leaks from the aorta through the weakened wall and is
phagocytized by macrophages, thus causing various immune responses and fibrosis in the end. But this hypothesis cannot account for the IRF
in the children who do not have any atherosclerotic change in the aorta. IRF usually manifests as diffuse fibrosis around the descending
aorta. IRF presented as a local mass, as in our case, is extremly rare. Chi reported, in 1978, a 42-year-old male patient with IRF16). His
chief complaint for one year was a palpable nontender mass in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. He was subjected to exploratory
laparotomy for the differential diagnosis of the retroperitoneal mass. The mass was localized and surrounded the left kidney, 25×17cm and
well-demarcated. Other reports on localized forms of IRF cases were given by Judith17) and Thomas G18) (Table 2). Such localized forms of
IRF should be differentiated from renal cell carcinoma, renal cortical or medullary carcinoma, lymphosarcoma, ureter tumors, pancreatic
cancer, rectal cancer and intrapelvic tumor or abscess. Ureterolysis is the treatment of choice for IRF. Ureterolysis involves dissecting
the ureter from surrounding fibrotic plaque and wrapping it with peritoneum or omentum (intraperitonealization) in order to prevent it from
re-fibrosis. Steroids are effective only at the early stage of the disease containing cellular infiltrates but does not help much in
advanced fibrotic phases with scanty infiltrating cells. (Early stages are suggested by the findings of an elevated ESR, eosinophilia, and
lymphocytic rather than fibroblastic infiltration in the biopsied plaque.) Azathioprine is another choice when steroid therapy is
ineffective. Some authors reported that comcomitant long-term treatment with steroid and azathioprine induced loss of retroperitoneal mass
and finally remission of hydonephrosis and lower leg edema19). Alternative therapies involve uses of indwelling urinary stent, percutaneous
nephrostomy and percutaneous balloon dilatation. This report was supported by a grant (No. 01-94-35) from the Seoul National University
Hospital Research Fund Light microscopy shows a slight increase in size of the glomeruli but otherwise no abnormal findings are observed
(H&E ×100). Postcontrast CT scan reveals that the mass is a mixture of highly attenuated solid portions and low-attenuated necrotic
portions. The outer margin of the mass is discrete and no intra-abdominal lymph node enlargement is observed. Anintravenous urography, the
right kidney is rotated upward on the frontal plane, but no abnormal finding is seen in the shape of calyx, pelvis and ureter, nor the
excretory function of both kidneys. A cross surface of the removed mass shows it to be a fairly well-circumscribed mass with fascicles of
fibrous tissue and two areas of cystic change. Photomicrographs of the mass show irregular fibrous bands and scattered inflammatory cell
collections (H&H ×100). At a higher magnification of the fibrous mass, the inflammatory cells consist of lymphocytes and some plasma cells
(H&E ×350). Laboratory Data of the Patient at the Time of Diagnosis of IRF Abbreviations: CBC, common bood count; WBC, white blood cell;
ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; RBC, red
blood cell; HPF, high power field; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; anti-HBsAb, anti-hepatitis B surface antibody; HCV, anti-hepatitis C
virus antibody; VDRL; venereal disease research laboratory
