As the popularity of laparoscopic cholecystectomy continues to grow, evaluation of patients with documented cholelithiasis and concomitant
vague abdominal complaints becomes less rigorous. We present the case of a patient with chronic cholecystitis documented by history and
ultrasonography, incidentally noted on laboratory examination to have peripheral blood eosinophilia. At the time of laparoscopy, an inflamed
segment of jejunum was discovered. Limited laparotomy and wedge biopsy revealed active eosinophilic enteritis. First described by Kaijser in
1937,1 eosinophilic enteritis is an uncommon gastrointestinal disorder characterized by symptoms of abdominal pain and partial obstruction.
Laparotomy and biopsy reveals pathologic findings of eosinophilic infiltration of bowel wall in the absence of parasitic or extraintestinal
disease. With less than 300 cases reported in the literature2 the true prevalence of this condition is unknown. The diagnosis is established
when histologic samples are obtained during endoscopy or laparotomy. The utility of laparoscopy makes it an ideal tool for evaluation of
bowel obstructions of uncertain etiology. A paucity of cases appears in the laparoendoscopic literature describing serosal eosinophilic
jejunitis diagnosed during diagnostic laparoscopy.3 This patient's presentation with colicky abdominal pain and emesis while suggestive of
acute cholecystitis, is suspicious in the absence of liver enzyme abnormalities and poorly localized pain. Leukocytosis with eosinophilia
was present on routine laboratory examination raising the possibility of eosinophilic enteritis in the differential diagnosis of this
patient's distention and pain. Computed tomography showed a segment of proximal small bowel with a thickened wall. Exploratory laparoscopy
revealed a loop of inflamed, thickened jejunum and the presence of turbid peritoneal fluid. Delivery of the loop of bowel and biopsy yielded
the pathologic diagnosis. A 54-year-old woman presented with chief complaints of colicky epigastric pain and emesis of two weeks duration,
exacerbated by eating. She is a retired nurse who emigrated from the Philippines eight years ago with no history of recent foreign travel or
known infectious disease contacts. Her past medical history included only hypertension. Physical examination demonstrated mild tenderness to
deep palpation in the epigastric area without rebound or guarding. Laboratory analysis showed a leukocyte count of 16,000 with marked
eosinophilia (14%). The serum chemistry and liver enzymes were within normal limits. Blood serology for giardia lambia was negative, as were
stool cultures. Chest and abdominal roentgenograms were unremarkable. A barium contrast study of the small bowel suggested a segment of
narrowing in the proximal jejunum (Figure 1). Abdominal ultrasonography showed a thickened gallbladder and cholelithiasis. 99mTechnicium-
iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan revealed normal visualization of the biliary system and gallbladder. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed normal
esophageal and gastric mucosa. Computed tomography of the abdomen with oral and intravenous contrast demonstrated marked thickening of a
loop of proximal small bowel (Figure 2). Upper gastrointestinal barium contrast study demonstrating extrinsic luminal narrowing of the
proximal jejunum. Computed tomogram of the abdomen with oral and intravenous contrast showing a thickened loop of proximal small bowel.
Video laparoscopy was performed under general anesthesia with an infraumbilical and three additional access ports. Upon entry to the
abdomen, turbid peritoneal fluid and a grossly dilated loop of jejunum were evident. After performing an uneventful cholecystectomy and
intraoperative cholangiogram, the transverse subxyphoid port site was extended to three centimeters in length and the questionable loop of
jejunum externalized. A wedge resection was performed. On gross inspection the seromuscular layer was thick and erythematous, but the mucosa
appeared normal. After repair of the enterotomy the bowel was returned to the abdomen and the wounds closed in layers. Pathologic
examination of the peritoneal fluid revealed a red blood cell count of 280,000/mm3 and a white blood cell count of 22,000/mm3, with
eosinophilia. Dense eosinophilic infiltration of the bowel serosa with normal histological mucosa was seen (Figure 3). The gallbladder
showed signs of chronic cholecystitis without evidence of eosinophilic infiltration. Photomicrograph (Hematoxylin and Eosin stain,
magnification 320X) of biopsied jejunal wall with a dense subserosal infiltration of eosinophils and a normal muscularis. The patient's
hospital course was uneventful. She was discharged on postoperative day three and at four months follow-up remains asymptomatic.
Eosinophilic enteritis most frequently involves the stomach and proximal small bowel. Lesions in the esophagus,4 colon,5 terminal ileum6 and
gallbladder7,8 have also been reported. In 1970, Klein proposed a classification system based on the depth of histological infiltration with
eosinophils.9 Talley et al.10 in their series of 50 patients identified mucosal infiltration in 23, muscle layer disease in 12, and
subserosal involvement in only five cases. Ten patients had classic abdominal symptoms and peripheral blood eosinophilia, but no
demonstrable gastrointestinal lesions. Hematologic studies show a range of blood eosinophilia from 8.5 to 80% of the total leukocyte count,
with as many as one-fourth of patients having a normal eosinophil count. Fifty to 75% of patients with this disorder report a history of
allergic hypersensitivity. The presenting symptoms can vary depending on the segment of gastrointestinal tract involved as well as the depth
of bowel wall eosinophilic infiltration (Table 1).11â€“13 Patients with mucosal disease report abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting,
and may manifest signs of intestinal malabsorption and protein losing enteropathy. The presentation of disease localized to the muscle layer
disease is usually partial or complete obstruction. Symptoms again include abdominal pain and distention. Clinical Manifestations of
Eosinophilic Enteritis Serosal disease occurs infrequently with a total of 28 cases reported.14 Abdominal pain and bloating are the
prevailing complaints. Presentation with eosinophilic ascites, an elevated peripheral blood eosinophil count, and dramatic response to
steroid treatment characterize this form of the disease. The eosinophil count of the ascitic fluid is usually elevated while abnormalities
in the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and peripheral eosinophil count are variable.13 The radiographic presentation, depending on the
segment involved, can suggest Crohn's disease, gastric outlet obstruction, or may simply show non-specific bowel wall thickening,15 as
illustrated in this case. The character of this patient's pain in the light of normal liver enzymes and a leukocytosis with eosinophilia
prompted our investigation with computed tomography in an attempt to localize the affected segment of bowel. A paucity of eosinophilic
enteritis cases described during laparoscopy has been reported. Operative findings include ascites, and a hyperemic, thickened bowel with
fibrinous exudate. The pathophysiology of this condition may be secondary to a derangement in the release of eosinophil major basic
protein.16 It remains unclear whether our patient's symptoms were attributable to her gallbladder disease or were a manifestation of ongoing
serosal eosinophilic infiltration of her jejunum. Furthermore, although remote from the site of the gallbladder, it is possible that
enteritis might have been a sequelae of chronic cholecystitis. Perhaps more aggressive investigation of local bowel abnormalities in acute
cholecystitis will reveal some degree of eosinophilic infiltration. The affected loop of jejunum appeared grossly abnormal through the
videoscope; our impression may, however, have been biased by the preoperative radiographic findings. Eosinophilic gastroenteritis arose in
our differential diagnosis only after a thorough hematologic evaluation. Whether or not the loop of jejunum in question would have appeared
sufficiently abnormal as to prompt further investigation during a routine laparoscopy will remain in question. The extension of the
subxyphoid port site with extracorporeal wedge resection of the intestine added minimal morbidity and cost to our procedure. Given the
number of laparoscopic procedures currently performed and the probable underdiagnosis of eosinophilic enteritis, we recommend patients
undergoing laparoscopy who show evidence of peripheral blood eosinophilia, ascites, or ill-defined gastrointestinal symptoms undergo a
thorough laparoscopic exploration of the abdomen. A sample of intraperitoneal fluid can easily be obtained to rule out an infectious or
neoplastic disease process, along with a minimally invasive biopsy or resection of bowel accomplished. While previous cases of eosinophilic
enteritis have been managed successfully with sodium cromoglycate,17,18 the current recommended treatment is a short course of high dose
prednisolone (40 milligrams per day for one week) followed by a maintenance regimen (5 to 10 milligrams per day). All patients in the study
by Lee et al.14 treated with this regimen had complete resolution of their symptoms and a return of their peripheral blood eosinophil count
to normal within four weeks.
