Review of international literature reveals eight reported cases of laparoscopic obturator hernia repair. Non-specific signs and symptoms
make the diagnosis of an obturator hernia difficult. Laparoscopic intervention provides a minimally invasive method to simultaneously
diagnose and repair these hernias. A 35 year old woman presented with lower abdominal pain, vaginal bleeding, and dyspareunia. During
gynecological diagnostic laparoscopy, a pelvic floor hernia was suspected, and a general surgical evaluation was sought. At a subsequent
laparoscopy, the diagnosis of a left direct inguinal and a right obturator hernia was made. Both were repaired laparoscopically with
polypropylene mesh. At follow-up at one and six weeks postoperatively, the patient's complaints of pain had completely resolved. The
diagnosis of obturator hernia is problematic. The usual presenting signs and symptoms are non-specific. Without conclusive historical or
physical findings, laparoscopy is an excellent method for diagnosing obturator hernia. This entity, once diagnosed laparoscopically, can be
repaired simultaneously via laparoscopic mesh technique. Obturator hernia is an anterior pelvic floor hernia which occurs through the
obturator canal, adjacent to the obturator vessels and nerve. The vessels lie lateral to the sac in about half the cases.1 Obturator hernias
are acquired lesions that are thought to result from progressive laxity of the pelvic floor which may be associated with multiparity,
increasing age1 and chronically elevated intra-abdominal pressure. Reported incidence of obturator hernia ranges from 0.05%2 to 0.07%3 of
all hernias, making them the most common of all the rare pelvic floor hernias. Previous authors have characterized the typical obturator
hernia patient as an emaciated, dehydrated, multiparous female.1,4–8 Two thirds of reported cases occurred in the seventh and eighth decades
of life.6 Although we may define characteristics of susceptible patients, symptoms of obturator hernia are often vague, making the
preoperative diagnosis challenging. Symptoms may include abdominal pain, vomiting, Howship-Romberg Sign, recurrent bouts of intestinal
obstruction, or a palpable upper thigh mass.6 For diagnosis and treatment, some authors advocate early use of laparotomy3,6,8 while others
prefer preoperative non-invasive diagnostic methods such as CT5,9 or contrast radiographs.10–12 We present a case of a relatively young
woman with an atypically symptomatic obturator hernia diagnosed and repaired laparoscopically. A 35 year old, 72 kg, female presented to her
gynecologist with a one year history of lower abdominal pain, dyspareunia, and vaginal bleeding after intercourse. The patient denied
nausea, vomiting, or change in bowel or bladder habits. Her menstrual history was noncontributory. The patient had no significant medical
history. She had two prior uncomplicated vaginal deliveries of three healthy children. Her only abdominal surgery was a tubal ligation 18
months prior to presentation. Her physical examination was unremarkable including normal pelvic and rectal examinations. The patient's
gynecologist made a preoperative diagnosis of dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Hysteroscopy, fractional dilation and curettage (D&C), and
diagnostic laparoscopy were planned. Diagnostic laparoscopy revealed an anteverted uterus of normal contour. Anterior and posterior cul-de-
sacs were clear, and both ovaries were normal. Photographs of the pelvic floor were taken because of a suspicion of possible disruption in
the continuity of the peritoneum. When the images were subsequently reviewed by the general surgeon, bilateral pelvic hernias without
incarceration were identified. A laparoscopic approach was chosen to repair both hernias. The patient was positioned in lithotomy. Open
technique, utilizing a Hasson trocar, was employed to establish a pneumoperitoneum. Two additional 12 mm trocars were placed on either side
of the abdomen at the umbilical level. A small left direct inguinal and a right obturator hernia were visualized. The left direct inguinal
hernia was treated by simple sac ligation utilizing 2-0 vicryl Endo loops. The repair of the obturator defect was performed by incising the
peritoneum of the anterior abdominal wall above the inguinal ligament, then medially to the right umbilical ligament, and laterally to the
right inferior epigastric vessels. The peritoned flap was further developed down to the most caudal aspect of the obturator hernia. The
skeletonized obturator defect was then closed by application of two pieces of 3 by 5 inch polypropylene mesh over the right obturator,
femoral and inguinal areas. The mesh was stapled to the abdominal wall and Cooper's ligament, with care taken to avoid the epigastric
vessels. The peritoneum was then closed over the mesh with staples. The abdominal wall fascial defects were closed with #1 PDS suture using
an Endoclose device. There were no complications; the patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on post-operative day one. At
follow-up at one and six months, the patient's symptoms had completely resolved. Obturator hernias account for 1.4% (17 of 1178) of all
hernias of the abdominopelvic wall.9 To date, approximately 743 cases of obturator hernia have been reported in the English language
literature, eight of which were repaired laparoscopically. The majority of patients are between 70 and 90 years old at presentation-
exceptionally, a patient as young as 32 days old has been reported.13 Obturator hernia is associated with a number of predisposing
conditions. Women are affected six times more frequently than men.14 The female pelvis is wider and the obturator canal opening is more
triangular with a greater transverse diameter,14 perhaps providing less resistance to herniation. Emaciation may also be an important
factor.9 It is postulated that with severe weight loss there is a decrease in the protective preperitoneal fat from the obturator canal.
Similarly, conditions associated with increased intra-abdominal pressure (e.g., chronic constipation, pulmonary disease, and ascites) may
also thin the preperitoneal fat and predispose patients to all types of hernias.8 Pregnancy and chronic illness also predispose patients to
hernia formation by increasing intra-abdominal pressure and relaxing the peritoneum.9 There are four “classic” features of an obturator
hernia: (1) a palpable mass in the groin with the patient supine, and the thigh flexed, adducted and rotated laterally; (2) intestinal
obstruction; (3) previous attacks of bowel obstruction resolving spontaneously; (4) the Howship-Romberg Sign.15 The Howship-Romberg Sign is
medial thigh and hip pain exacerbated by adduction and medial rotation of the thigh and relieved by thigh flexion.7 It is reportedly present
in 15% - 50% of obturator hernia patients.14 The characteristic clinical profile of previously reported patients is that of an elderly,
emaciated woman with concomitant medical illness, but without previous abdominal surgery, presenting with intestinal obstruction.4–7,9,14
Our patient was young, of average weight, and had two prior pregnancies (although one for twins). She had no abnormalities detected on
physical examination, nor episodes of bowel obstruction, but had pain with intercourse as her most prominent symptom. This symptom has not
previously been described. Although there is no consensus of opinion, previous authors have recommended the abdominal approach to suspected
obturator hernias because one can establish the diagnosis, obtain adequate exposure, protect the obturator vessels, and identify and resect
compromised bowel when necessary.4 An abdominal approach through a lower mid-line incision is most favored, although the inguinal approach
and the Cheatle-Henry retropubic approach may also be used.3,16,17 We believe that a laparoscopic approach for suspected obturator hernia is
superior to described open techniques. Because variable symptomatology makes its preoperative diagnosis difficult, laparoscopy offers a
relatively noninvasive method to identify and treat obturator hernias. No special skills are required beyond those now commonly in use for
laparoscopic repair of inguinal hernias, and recovery should be shorter than after laparotomy. Controversies regarding costs and operative
time are analogous to those regarding groin hernias and will be ongoing. The laparoscopic approach to obturator hernia repair is an
effective alternative to conventional methods. Appropriate patient selection, sound surgical judgment, and adherence to established
principles of laparoscopic repair of the pelvic floor are essential to success. Continued scrutiny and critical review of this technique
are, of course, necessary.
