Zellweger syndrome and related diseases are caused by defective import of peroxisomal matrix proteins. In all previously reported Zellweger
syndrome cell lines the defect could be assigned to the matrix protein import pathway since peroxisome membranes were present, and import of
integral peroxisomal membrane proteins was normal. However, we report here a Zellweger syndrome patient (PBD061) with an unusual cellular
phenotype, an inability to import peroxisomal membrane proteins. We also identified human PEX16, a novel integral peroxisomal membrane
protein, and found that PBD061 had inactivating mutations in the PEX16 gene. Previous studies have suggested that peroxisomes arise from
preexisting peroxisomes but we find that expression of PEX16 restores the formation of new peroxisomes in PBD061 cells. Peroxisome synthesis
and peroxisomal membrane protein import could be detected within 2–3 h of PEX16 injection and was followed by matrix protein import. These
results demonstrate that peroxisomes do not necessarily arise from division of preexisting peroxisomes. We propose that peroxisomes may form
by either of two pathways: one that involves PEX11-mediated division of preexisting peroxisomes, and another that involves PEX16-mediated
formation of peroxisomes in the absence of preexisting peroxisomes. Membrane-bound organelles appear to be synthesized by fission and fusion
of homotypic organelles or budding from heterotypic organelles. These common modes of organelle biogenesis also represent attractive models
for peroxisome biogenesis. The hypothesis that peroxisomes are derived from the ER was proposed nearly 30 yr ago (Novikoff and Shin, 1964).
However, this hypothesis was largely abandoned when it was found that peroxisomal enzymes were imported directly from the cytoplasm to the
peroxisome, rather than via the ER (Lazarow et al., 1982). Peroxisomal membrane proteins (PMPs)1 are also imported directly from the
cytoplasm (Fujiki et al., 1984), and together these results led to the currently favored hypothesis that peroxisomes form by division of
preexisting peroxisomes (Lazarow and Fujiki, 1985). However, there is little direct evidence for how peroxisomes are synthesized. To
distinguish between these different models for peroxisome biogenesis we and others have searched for mutants that are unable to import PMPs
into peroxisomes, and thus, fail to synthesize peroxisome membranes. In addition to studies in yeast (Höhfeld et al., 1991; Wiemer et al.,
1996; Gotte et al., 1998) (Gould, S.J., and S. South, manuscript in preparation), we have examined human cell lines derived from patients
who suffer from disorders of peroxisome biogenesis. The peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs) include Zellweger syndrome, neonatal
adrenoleukodystrophy, infantile Refsum disease, and rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (Lazarow and Moser, 1995). This group of
genetically heterogeneous, lethal diseases is characterized by severe mental retardation, loss of multiple peroxisomal metabolic functions,
and defective import of one or more classes of peroxisomal matrix proteins. All previously characterized PBD cell lines import PMPs normally
and contain numerous peroxisomes, leading to the hypothesis that the PBDs are caused by defects in peroxisomal matrix protein import and not
the biogenesis of peroxisome membranes (Santos et al., 1988a). The cellular and molecular analysis of PBD cells has demonstrated that PMP
import is fundamentally different from the matrix protein import pathways, but until now has done little to advance our understanding of
peroxisome membrane biogenesis, or PMP import. Here we describe a cell line from a Zellweger syndrome patient, PBD061, that differs from
previously reported PBD cell lines. Specifically, it is unable to import PMPs, and lacks detectable peroxisome membranes. The
characterization of PBD061 cells and the gene product defective in this cell line, PEX16, revealed the following: PEX16 is required for
peroxisome synthesis, and peroxisomes can form in the absence of preexisting peroxisomes. Possible mechanisms for peroxisome synthesis in
rescued PBD061 cells and in normal cells are discussed. Skin fibroblasts from PBD patients were obtained from Ann and Hugo Moser (The
Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD), and from the Coriell Cell Repository (Camden, NJ). All cell lines were cultured in high glucose
DME that was supplemented with penicillin, streptomycin, and 10% fetal calf serum. Cell lines in this report are referred to by a unique PBD
number with the exception of the normal human fibroblast cell line, 5756T (an SV-40–transformed derivative of GM5756; Coriell Cell
Repository), and the hepatoblastoma cell line HepG2 (a gift from Michael Schrader, Baltimore, MD). The CG1 cell line, PBD009, has
inactivating mutations on both PEX1 alleles, and lacks detectable levels of PEX1 mRNA and protein (Reuber et al., 1997). The CG2 cell line,
PBD005, is homozygous for an inactivating mutation in PEX5, and lacks detectable levels of PEX5 mRNA and protein (Dodt et al., 1995). The
CG3 cell line, PBD097, is a compound heterozygote for two inactivating frameshift mutations in PEX12 (Chang et al., 1997). The CG4 cell
line, PBD105, is also a compound heterozygote for two inactivating frameshift mutations, except in the PEX6 gene (Yahraus et al., 1996). The
CG7 cell line, PBD100, is homozygous for a splice donor site mutation in PEX10 and expresses a PEX10 mRNA with a large internal deletion
that lacks PEX10 activity (Warren et al., 1998). The gene that is mutated in cells from complementation group 8 of the PBDs is unknown but
the CG8 cell line used in this study, PBD109, was equally or more severely deficient in peroxisomal matrix protein import than any other CG8
cell line. The CG9 cell line, PBD061, is equivalent to GM6231, a Zellweger syndrome cell line from the Coriell Cell Repository. The CG10
cell line, PBD094, is homozygous for an inactivating nonsense mutation in the PEX2 gene (Shimozawa et al., 1992). The CG13 cell line,
PBD222, is the sole representative of this complementation group and was derived from a neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy patient. Again, the
gene defective in this patient remains to be determined. Aside from PBD222, all cell lines used in this study were derived from severely
affected Zellweger syndrome patients. Antibodies to PMP70 were obtained from Gerardo Jimenez-Sanchez and David Valle (The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD). Antibodies to P70R were obtained from Wilhelm Just (University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany). mAbs to the myc epitope tag were obtained from the tissue culture supernatant of the hybridoma 1-9E10 (Evan et al., 1985). To
generate antibodies to PEX16, we first expressed amino acids 145–336 of PEX16 in fusion with the maltose binding protein. The resulting
maltose binding protein–PEX16 fusion was purified by affinity chromatography on an amylose resin according to the manufacturer's
instructions (New England Biolabs Inc.). The purified fusion protein was then injected into rabbits and polyclonal sera were collected. The
sera displaying the highest titer against in vitro synthesized PEX16 was used for all experiments. Fluorescently labeled secondary
antibodies were obtained from commercial sources. Horseradish peroxidase–labeled anti– rabbit secondary antibodies were also obtained from
commercial sources. Cells were cultured on glass coverslips and processed for indirect immunofluorescence as follows. Cells were washed
twice in Dulbecco's phosphate buffered saline (DPBS; 0.2 g/liter KCl, 0.2 g/liter KH2PO4, 8.0 g/liter NaCl, 21.6 g/liter Ha2HPO4, pH 7.1),
and fixed for 15 min in 3.7% formaldehyde in DPBS, followed by two washes with DPBS. Unless otherwise noted, the cells were then
permeabilized by incubation in 1% Triton X-100 in DPBS for 5 min to permeabilize all cellular membranes. Cells were washed twice in DPBS,
and incubated with the primary antibody or antibodies for 15 min. All antibody incubations were performed in DPBS that was supplemented with
5% nonspecific goat serum. Next, the cells were washed 10 times with DPBS, and incubated with the appropriate secondary antibodies in 5%
nonspecific goat serum and DPBS for 15 min. Cells were washed 10 times, and mounted on glass slides in a solution of 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH
8.5, 90% glycerol, and 0.1% para-phenylenediamine. For differential permeabilization experiments in which the plasma membrane is
permeabilized but the peroxisome membrane remains intact, the Triton X-100 incubation was omitted and cells were permeabilized instead by
incubation in 25 μg/ml digitonin in DPBS for 5 min. Cells were visualized on an Olympus fluorescence microscope and all images were
collected on film (T-Maxx 400; Eastman-Kodak). Candidate cDNAs for the mammalian PEX16 gene were identified by searching the database of
expressed sequence tags using the TBLASTN algorithm. A mouse cDNA capable of encoding a protein similar to Yarrowia lipolytica PEX16 was
identified. The sequence of the murine PEX16 cDNA was used to identify a human PEX16 cDNA by BLAST searches of the human database of
expressed sequence tags. Clones encoding the human PEX16 cDNA were obtained from Genome Systems Inc. and sequenced in their entirety. The
PEX16 ORF was also amplified from a full-length cDNA clone using PEX16-specific oligonucleotides 5′-CCCGGTACCATGGAGAAGCTGCGGCTCCTGGGC-3′ and
5′-CCAAGCGGCCGCAGTTTTATTAGGGAAGAGGGGC-3′. The resulting PCR products were digested with Asp718 and NotI, and cloned between the Asp718 and
NotI sites of pcDNA3, creating pcDNA3-PEX16. The PEX16 insert in this plasmid was sequenced in its entirety to ensure that no mutations were
introduced during the cloning process. The cDNA and deduced protein sequences for human PEX16 are available from GenBank (accession number
AF118240). Mutation detection was performed initially by RT-PCR. RNA was extracted from PBD061 cells and from a control human fibroblast and
converted to PEX16 cDNA as follows. Approximately 1 μg of total RNA from an unaffected individual and from PBD061 was used as template in a
cDNA synthesis reaction using a PEX16-specific oligonucleotide (5′-CCAAGCGGCCGCAGTTTTATTAGGGAAGAGGGGC-3′) and Superscript reverse
transcriptase (Life Sciences Inc.). 3 μl of the cDNA synthesis reaction products was used as template in PCR using the PEX16-specific
oligonucleotides 5′-CCTAAGACCGGAAGCAGGAAGGAG-3′, and 5′-ACACCCTCCTTCCGGGAGGTCTGT-3′ that lie in the 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions of the
PEX16 cDNA. A product of the correct size was obtained from each reaction. However, the yield of PEX16 cDNA from PBD061 RNA was
significantly lower than that obtained from control RNAs, a result that was consistently observed in multiple experiments. The PEX16 cDNAs
from the control group, and PBD061 cells were sequenced directly and in their entirety. The control fragment matched the PEX16 cDNA sequence
exactly. In contrast, the PEX16 cDNA from PBD061 had a 1-bp substitution in which the first nucleotide of the arginine 176 codon, CGA, was
converted to a T, terminating the PEX16 ORF about halfway through the coding region (data not shown). The sequence chromatograph of the
PEX16 cDNA from PBD061 showed no evidence of the C at this position. However, a wide array of mutations may result in altered mRNA abundance
and it is, therefore, common for a mutation to appear homozygous at the cDNA level even though there may be different mutations on the two
alleles in the patient. To test whether PBD061 cells were homozygous for the R176ter mutation we first had to determine the PEX16 genomic
organization in the region of the mutation. Oligonucleotide primers flanking the site of mutation, and based on the cDNA sequence, were used
in various combinations in PCR reactions with total human genomic DNA from an unaffected individual as a template. One set of
oligonucleotides (5′-CAGCCCTGGCAACCATGAGCAGTC-3′ and 5′-CAAAAACTCTGCGATGGTCTCC-3′) amplified a DNA fragment that was ∼100 bp larger than
expected from the cDNA sequence, indicating that it spanned an intron and therefore would be derived from genomic DNA. Direct sequence
analysis confirmed this hypothesis as the cDNA sequences of the amplicon were interrupted by a 134-bp segment that had all of the features
of a human intron. These same oligonucleotides were used to amplify a PEX16 gene fragment spanning the site of mutation from the genomic DNA
of an unaffected individual and PBD061. The structure of each product was determined by direct sequence analysis. The PEX16 expression
vector, pcDNA3-PEX16, was described above. The plasmid pcDNA3-PEX16/R176ter was created by T/A cloning the PEX16 RT-PCR product that was
generated from PBD061 RNA into the pCR2.1 vector (Invitrogen Corp.). The resulting clone was sequenced in its entirety to ensure that no
other mutations were introduced during the amplification process. The PEX16/R176ter cDNA was released from this plasmid,
pCR2.1-PEX16/R176ter, by digestion with EcoRI and cloned into the unique EcoRI site of pcDNA3, creating pcDNA3-PEX16/ R176ter. The COOH-
terminal myc-tagged derivative of the PEX16 cDNA was generated by PCR using the wild-type PEX16 cDNA as a template, the oligonucleotide
5′-CCCGGTACCATGGAGAAGCTGCGGCTCCTGGGC-3′ at the 5′ end and the oligonucleotide 5′-CCAAAGATCTGCCCCAACTGTAGAAGTAGATTTTC-3′ at the 3′ end, which
replaces the stop codon with a BglII site. The resulting fragment was cleaved with Asp718 and BglII and inserted between the Asp718 and
BamHI sites of pcDNA3-myc (Yahraus et al., 1996), creating the plasmid pcDNA3-PEX16myc. This plasmid carries a modified PEX16 ORF that
encodes the 10–amino acid long c-myc epitope tag at the COOH terminus of PEX16. The NH2-terminal myc-tagged derivative of the PEX16 cDNA was
generated by PCR using the wild-type PEX16 cDNA as a template, the oligonucleotide 5′-CCCGTCGACGGAGAAGCTGCGGCTCCTGGGCCTC-3′ at the 5′ end
and the oligonucleotide 5′-CCAAGCGGCCGCAGTTTTATTAGGGAAGAGGGGC-3′ at the 3′ end. This cDNA fragment was cleaved with SalI and NotI, and
cloned between the XhoI and NotI sites of the NH2-terminal myc tag vector, pcDNA3-N-myc. This plasmid carries a high efficiency initiation
codon, and the c-myc epitope tag upstream of the XhoI and NotI sites. The resulting plasmid, pcDNA3- mycPEX16, encodes the 10–amino acid
long c-myc epitope tag at the 5′ end of the PEX16 ORF. The plasmid that expresses the maltose binding protein–PEX16 fusion (pMBP-PEX16) was
created by amplifying a subfragment of the PEX16 cDNA by PCR using the PEX16 cDNA as a template, and the oligonucleotides
5′-CCCGTCGACACTGGACAGAGAGACCCAGGCAC-3′, and 5′-CCAAGCGGCCGCAGTTTTATTAGGGAAGAGGGGC-3′. This fragment encoding amino acids 145–336 of PEX16,
was cleaved with SalI and NotI, and inserted between the SalI and NotI sites of pMBP, a modified version of pMALc2 (New England Biolabs
Inc.) The plasmids designed to express PMP70myc, PEX12myc, PMP32myc, PEX3myc, PEX11αmyc, and PEX11βmyc all consist of the full-length human
cDNA cloned into the mammalian expression vector pcDNA3-myc in such a way as to encode the 10–amino acid myc tag after the COOH-terminal
amino acid of each protein, followed immediately by a stop codon. All cell lines were actively growing before transfection or injection.
Transfections were performed by growing cells to near confluency on two T75 flasks, harvesting the cells by trypsinization, and
electroporating them as described in Chang et al. (1997). Microinjections were performed with DNA at a concentration of 1 μg/ml in reverse
phosphate buffered saline (4 mM NaHPO4, 1 mM KH2PO4, 140 mM KCl, pH 7.3). DNAs were injected into the nucleus of cells at a pressure of 100
mmHg for 0.4 s. Total cellular proteins were extracted from cultured fibroblasts as described (Dodt and Gould, 1996). For subcellular
fractionation experiments, postnuclear supernatants were prepared from HepG2 cells by homogenization in a Balch homogenizer followed by
successive centrifugation steps to remove nuclei and unbroken cells. The resulting clarified supernatant was separated by density gradient
centrifugation (Nycodenz; Nycomed Pharma) as described in Dodt et al. (1995). Equal amounts of each fraction were assayed for catalase,
succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), and NADPH-cytochrome reductase (NCR) to follow the peroxisomes, mitochondria, and microsomes, respectively.
Equal amounts of each fraction were also separated by SDS-PAGE and assayed for PEX16 levels by Western blot as described in Crane et al.
(1994). For membrane extractions, a light mitochondrial pellet was obtained by centrifugation of a HepG2 postnuclear supernatant at 25,000 g
for 30 min. The pellet fraction was then extracted with 10 mM Tris, pH 8.3 on ice for 20 min with agitation. This sample was separated into
a membrane pellet, and a soluble supernatant by centrifugation at 200,000 g for 30 min. The supernatant was saved and the pellet was
subjected to extraction with 1 M NaCl on ice for 20 min with agitation. This sample was separated into a membrane pellet, and a soluble
supernatant by centrifugation at 200,000 g for 30 min. The supernatant was saved, and the pellet was subjected to extraction with 100 mM
Na2CO3 pH 11.5 on ice for 20 min with agitation. The carbonate extracted supernatant and pellet were separated by centrifugation at 200,000
g for 30 min. The levels of PEX16 in each sample were determined by semiquantitative Western blotting after separating equal proportions of
the three supernatants and the carbonate extracted pellet by SDS-PAGE. Protease protection experiments were performed as follows. A
postnuclear supernatant was prepared from HepG2 cells and a light mitochondrial pellet was obtained as above. This was resuspended in 0.25 M
sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and 1 mM EDTA. Equal proportions were aliquoted to eight different tubes. Triton X-100 was added to four of
the tubes to a final concentration of 1%. Either 0, 15, 30, or 60 μg of the protease trypsin (Sigma Chemical Co.) was added to an aliquot
that contained Triton X-100 and to an aliquot that lacked protease. These samples were incubated on ice for 20 min, and protease digestion
was terminated by adding a twofold excess of bovine trypsin inhibitor. Equal proportions of each sample were separated by SDS-PAGE and PEX16
was detected by Western blot. Little is known about the mechanisms of PMP import or the synthesis of peroxisome membranes. To identify cell
lines that are defective in these processes we screened skin fibroblasts from over 100 PBD patients for the presence of PMP-containing
peroxisomal structures. Each cell line was processed for indirect immunofluorescence using antibodies specific for PMP70, an integral
membrane protein of the peroxisome. Previous studies have reported that PBD cells contain peroxisomes and import PMPs (Santos et al., 1988a,
1988b) and we detected numerous PMP70-containing peroxisomes in virtually all cell lines examined. These included representatives of
complementation groups 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, and 13 (Fig. 1). However, we did identify one cell line, PBD061, which failed to import PMP70
into peroxisomes (Fig. 1, I). This cell line was derived from a severely affected Zellweger syndrome patient and is the sole representative
of PBD complementation group 9 (Moser et al., 1995). To test whether the absence of PMP70 staining in PBD061 cells reflected a generalized
defect in PMP import or a peculiarity of PMP70 distribution, representatives of all complementation groups were also processed for indirect
immunofluorescence using antibodies specific for other PMPs, including ALDP (Mosser et al., 1994), and P70R (Shani et al., 1997). These
antibodies also revealed the presence of numerous PMP-containing peroxisomes in representatives of all complementation groups except for the
CG9 cell line, PBD061 (data not shown). As an independent test of this phenotype we followed the distribution of overexpressed PMPs in this
cell line. Plasmids designed to express the integral peroxisomal membrane proteins PMP70myc, PEX12myc and PMP32myc (a human peroxisomal
solute carrier) were transfected into PBD061 cells and a control PBD fibroblast line, PBD094, which is mutated in the PEX2 gene (Shimozawa
et al., 1992). We were unable to detect peroxisomal or vesicular staining for these PMPs in PBD061 cells, even though all three proteins
were efficiently targeted to peroxisome membranes in PBD094 cells (Fig. 2). Similar rates of transfection in both cell lines were confirmed
by cotransfection with a cytosolic marker expression vector (data not shown). Similar results were observed in cells transfected with
expression vectors designed to express other human PMPs, including PEX3myc (Kammerer et al., 1998), PEX10myc (Warren et al., 1998),
PEX11αmyc (Schrader et al., 1998), PEX11βmyc (Schrader et al., 1998), and PEX13myc (Gould et al., 1996) (data not shown). Although we were
unable to detect peroxisomal or vesicular structures with any of the 11 PMPs tested, it is possible that some as yet unidentified PMPs may
reside in some type of peroxisome-related structure in PBD061 cells. To better understand the fates of PMPs in PBD061 cells, total cellular
protein was extracted from the CG9 cell line, PBD061, and a CG10 cell line, PBD094, as well as from PBD061, and PBD094 cells that had been
transfected with the PEX12myc expression vector. The abundance of the PMPs (PMP70, P70R, PEX14, and PEX12myc) were then determined by
immunoblot with antibodies specific for each protein (Fig. 3). As evident from this experiment, levels of full-length PMP70 and P70R in
PBD061 cells were below the limit of detection in PBD061 cells but were readily detected in PBD094 cells, indicating that these proteins
might be degraded in PBD061 cells. This hypothesis is supported by the presence of anti–P70R-reactive products of lower molecular mass in
PBD061 cells, but not in PBD094 cells. However, this was not the fate of all PMPs, since levels of PEX14 were similar in PBD061 cells and
PBD094 cells, as were levels of PEX12myc. Thus, the fate of PMPs in a cell line defective in PMP import varies from protein to protein, just
as the fate of peroxisomal matrix proteins varies in cells with specific defects in matrix protein import (Lazarow and Fujiki, 1985; Santos
et al., 1988a, 1988b). The prevailing model of peroxisome biogenesis holds that peroxisomes are formed by division of preexisting
peroxisomes. Thus, it was an open question as to whether peroxisome synthesis could be restored in a cell line such as PBD061; and the
identification of the gene defective in PBD061 cells would likely have a significant impact on our understanding of peroxisome biogenesis.
We employed the homology probing strategy that has been used previously to identify human homologues of other yeast PEX genes (Dodt et al.,
1996). The database of expressed sequence tags was searched for mammalian homologues of the Y. lipolytica PEX16 gene and a single human
homologue was identified (Fig. 4 A). This human PEX16 cDNA was inserted into a mammalian expression vector and the resulting plasmid,
pcDNA3-PEX16, was transfected into PBD061 cells. 3 d after transfection the cells were processed for indirect immunofluorescence using
antibodies specific for the peroxisome membrane marker, PMP70, and a peroxisomal matrix protein, catalase. Expression of PEX16 rescued both
PMP and matrix protein import in PBD061 cells, demonstrating that peroxisomes can form in the absence of preexisting peroxisomes (Fig. 4).
No rescue was observed in cells transfected with the vector alone. The functional complementation experiments described above indicated that
this patient would have mutations in the PEX16 gene. The PEX16 cDNA was amplified from control and PBD061 RNAs by RT-PCR, and direct
sequence analysis revealed the presence of a nonsense mutation in the PEX16/PBD061 cDNA population (data not shown). This mutation, a C-to-T
transition at a CpG dinucleotide, converts the arginine 176 codon to a nonsense codon (R176ter), and appeared to represent the only form of
PEX16 mRNA present in PBD061 cells. To determine whether this mutation was present at the genomic DNA level we amplified an appropriate
fragment of the PEX16 gene from control and PBD061 genomic DNAs. Direct sequence analysis showed only the mutant form of the gene in PBD061
(Fig. 5, A and B), indicating that this patient is homozygous for the R176ter mutation. The R176ter mutation is predicted to delete the
COOH-terminal half of PEX16, suggesting that it may have a severe effect on gene function. To test this directly we engineered the R176ter
mutation into the PEX16 cDNA expression vector and assayed the effects of this mutation by functional complementation. PBD061 fibroblasts
were transfected with the expression vectors pcDNA3-HsPEX16/R176ter and pcDNA3-HsPEX16. After 3 d, cells from each population were processed
for indirect immunofluorescence using anti-PMP70 and anticatalase antibodies to assess the reconstitution of peroxisome biogenesis. The
PEX16/R176ter cDNA displayed no rescue activity, indicating that the R176ter mutation had a severe effect on PEX16 function (Fig. 5, C–F).
While the above results demonstrated that PEX16 is required for peroxisome biogenesis they did not reveal how PEX16 might perform this role.
Since the physical location of proteins can provide useful insight into their function we first determined the subcellular distribution of
PEX16. Antibodies to PEX16 were generated and recognized a polypeptide of 38 kD, the predicted molecular mass of PEX16, in human cell
extracts (data not shown). These antibodies were used to localize PEX16 in subcellular fractionation experiments. A postnuclear supernatant
was prepared from HepG2 cells and fractionated by Nycodenz density gradient centrifugation. Fractions were assayed for marker enzymes of
peroxisomes, mitochondria, and microsomes, as well as PEX16 (Fig. 6 A). PEX16 behaved as a typical PMP, localizing only to the high-density,
catalase-containing peroxisomal fractions (rupture of peroxisomes during homogenization and centrifugation leads to the presence of
peroxisomal matrix proteins at the top of the gradient, demonstrated here by the presence of catalase activity in the low density
fractions). Sequence analysis predicted that the 336–amino acid-long PEX16 protein contained two transmembrane domains: one among amino
acids 110–144, and another spanning amino acids 222–243 (Fig. 3 A). To test the hypothesis that PEX16 was a PMP we prepared another
postnuclear supernatant from HepG2 cells and collected peroxisomes, mitochondria, and other large organelles by centrifugation at 25,000 g.
This light mitochondrial fraction was subjected to successive extractions with hypotonic buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 8.5), high salt (1 M NaCl),
and high pH (100 mM Na2CO3, pH 11.5). These treatments are designed to release soluble peroxisomal enzymes, electrostatically associated
membrane proteins, and tightly associated membrane proteins, respectively (Fujiki et al., 1982). Integral PMPs are predicted to remain in
the carbonate-extracted membrane pellet. Western blot analysis revealed that PEX16 behaved as an integral PMP, remaining in the membrane
pellet even after carbonate extraction (Fig. 6 B). To assess the topology of PEX16 in the peroxisome membrane we first performed protease
protection experiments on a light mitochondrial fraction of HepG2 cells. Exogenous protease reduced PEX16 from 38 to 15 kD in the absence of
detergent (Fig. 6 C), demonstrating that a significant portion of PEX16 extends into the cytoplasm. The anti-PEX16 antibodies used in this
experiment were raised against its COOH-terminal 189 amino acids, which comprises the segment between the two transmembrane domains, the
second transmembrane domain, and the 10-kD COOH-terminal tail. The only topology that is consistent with these results is for PEX16 to
reside in the peroxisome membrane with its NH2 and COOH termini extending into the cytoplasm and its intermembrane loop protected in the
peroxisome lumen. To test PEX16 orientation by an independent method we generated tagged versions of the PEX16 cDNA expression vectors: one
designed to express the c-myc tag at the NH2 terminus of PEX16 (pcDNA3-mycPEX16), and one designed to express the c-myc tag at its COOH
terminus (pcDNA3-PEX16myc). Normal human fibroblasts were transfected with these plasmids. After 2 d of incubation, the cells were processed
for immunofluorescence using antibodies specific for the myc epitope tag and for catalase, a peroxisomal matrix protein (Fig. 7). The
mycPEX16 and PEX16myc proteins both colocalized with catalase, confirming that PEX16 is a peroxisomal protein. Furthermore, the mycPEX16 and
PEX16myc proteins were detected under differential permeabilization conditions that preclude the detection of intraperoxisomal antigens,
confirming that PEX16 is a peroxisomal membrane protein with its NH2 and COOH termini extending into the cytoplasm. Surprisingly,
overexpression of mycPEX16 or PEX16myc never induced peroxisome proliferation, suggesting that there may be a functional distinction between
factors that are required for peroxisome membrane synthesis and those that are involved in peroxisome proliferation, such as PEX11α and
PEX11β (Schrader et al., 1998). In control experiments, the mycPEX16 and PEX16myc expression vectors were able to rescue peroxisome
synthesis in PBD061 cells, confirming that these localization studies were performed with functional forms of PEX16 (data not shown). PEX16
was first identified in the yeast Y. lipolytica. Although previous studies of PMP biogenesis have reported that they are synthesized in the
cytoplasm and imported into peroxisomes posttranslationally (Lazarow and Fujiki, 1985), the analysis of Y. lipolytica PEX16 suggested that
this protein is inserted into the ER, and it traffics to peroxisomes in a PEX1- and PEX6-dependent manner (Eitzen et al., 1997; Titorenko et
al., 1997; Titorenko and Rachubinski, 1998b). This model for PEX16 biogenesis is built on the following observations: YlPEX16 accumulates in
the ER in the absence of either the PEX1 or PEX6 genes; a pulse of YlPEX16 expression can be detected first in the ER and subsequently in
the peroxisome; and YlPEX16 is modified by N-linked glycosylation. Given that the loss of human PEX16 results in the absence of peroxisomes
from the cell, a similar biogenic pathway for human PEX16 would implicate the ER as a possible source of newly synthesized peroxisomes in
rescued PBD061 cells. We first examined the distribution of PEX16myc in cells that lack PEX1. PBD009 cells have inactivating mutations on
both PEX1 alleles, lack PEX1 mRNA and protein (Reuber et al., 1997), and would be expected to accumulate PEX16myc in the ER. In contrast to
the expected results, we found that PEX16myc colocalized with the peroxisomal membrane marker, P70R, in PEX1-deficient PBD009 cells (Fig. 8,
A and B). Next, we replicated the pulsed expression experiments. However, because of the need to detect PEX16myc at the very earliest time
points during its expression, we had to deliver the PEX16myc expression vector by nuclear microinjection rather than electroporation. The
normal human fibroblast line 5756T was injected with pcDNA3-PEX16myc and then processed for indirect immunofluorescence at 0.5, 1, 2, and 3
h after injection. The first time point that we detected PEX16myc expression was 2 h after injection, at which point all of the PEX16myc
appeared to colocalize with the peroxisomal membrane marker, P70R (Fig. 8, C and D). Examination of multiple cells at the 2- and 3-h time
points showed a similar peroxisomal distribution of PEX16myc. The fact that human PEX16 lacks a consensus sequence for N-linked
oligosaccharide addition, Asn-Xaa-Ser/Thr, made it impossible to follow N-linked glycosylation as a test of whether PEX16 entered the ER
before its delivery to peroxisomes. The recent evidence for ER involvement in peroxisome biogenesis is not limited to the biogenesis of
PEX16 in Y. lipolytica. Other tantalizing evidence includes the observation that brefeldin A (BFA) blocks peroxisome biogenesis in Hansenula
polymorpha (Solomos et al., 1997), and the finding that ARF and COPI may play a role in peroxisome proliferation in mammalian cells
(Passreiter et al., 1998). Since PEX16 plays an essential role in peroxisome synthesis we tested whether BFA might block the targeting of
PEX16 to peroxisomes in normal cells. Normal human fibroblasts were incubated in 10 μg/ml BFA for 30 min and then injected with the
pcDNA3-PEX16myc expression vector. The cells were maintained in the same concentration of BFA and processed for indirect immunofluorescence
at various times after injection. Peroxisomal PEX16myc was detected in peroxisomes 2 h after injection, demonstrating that BFA did not
inhibit the targeting of PEX16myc to peroxisomes (Fig. 8, E and F). We also tested whether incubation at 15°C, a treatment that blocks exit
of proteins from the ER/Golgi intermediate compartment (Saraste and Kuismanen, 1984), had any effect on PEX16myc targeting to peroxisomes.
We failed to detect any significant inhibition of PEX16myc targeting to peroxisomes in cells incubated at 15°C as compared to cells
incubated at 37°C (data not shown). These experiments failed to provide evidence for an ER role in PEX16myc biogenesis. Most proteins which
enter the ER do so cotranslationally, and, thus, are never present in the cytosolic fraction before association with a sedimental organelle.
We attempted to follow the biogenesis of PEX16 in pulse–chase experiments but were unable to incorporate enough radioactivity into newly
synthesized PEX16 to detect the protein after even a long (1 h) pulse labeling period (data not shown). Therefore, we were unable to use
pulse–chase experiments to determine whether PEX16 enters the peroxisome directly from the cytoplasm or indirectly through the ER. The
restoration of peroxisome synthesis in PBD061 cells demonstrated that peroxisomes do not necessarily arise by division of preexisting
peroxisomes. To characterize the process by which this occurs we followed the appearance of peroxisomes at various times after injection of
PBD061 cells with the PEX16 expression vector. At each time point, cells were processed for indirect immunofluorescence using antibodies
specific for the peroxisomal membrane marker, PMP70, and the peroxisomal matrix marker, catalase. We were unable to detect any peroxisomal
structures 30 min, 1, or 2 h after injection. However, by 3 h after injection we started to observe P70R-containing structures that could be
detected over and above background staining (Fig. 9, A and B). These structures generally did not contain the matrix protein catalase, and
were much reduced in number as compared to normal cells or fully rescued PBD061 cells. In addition, peroxisomes detected at early time
points often appeared to form elongated structures similar to those that form at early times in the PEX11β-mediated proliferation of human
peroxisomes. At later time points, ∼18–24 h after injection or transfection, peroxisomes of more normal distribution and abundance could be
detected, although these commonly lacked significant levels of catalase (Fig. 9, C and D). At later time points (36–72 h after injection or
transfection), the proportion of rescued cells that contained both P70R and catalase increased (Fig. 9, E and F), although it never attained
unity. In no instance did we observe punctate catalase in the absence of P70R-containing peroxisomes (data not shown). Taken together, these
results suggest that peroxisome synthesis occurs in a multistep fashion beginning with the formation of a limited number of PMP-containing
vesicles, followed by the elongation and proliferation of peroxisomal structures, and ending with the robust import of peroxisomal membrane
and matrix proteins. However, it should be noted that low but detectable numbers of catalase-importing cells could be detected at early time
points after injection of the PEX16 expression vector. Similar rates of rescue were observed in the presence of BFA, demonstrating that
peroxisome synthesis is insensitive to this inhibitor of vesicular transport (Fig. 9, G and H). We repeated these kinetic studies using the
PEX16myc expression vector. PBD061 cells were injected with pcDNA3- PEX16myc and processed for indirect immunofluorescence using antibodies
specific for the myc epitope tag and for P70R. As with the wild-type expression vector, rescue could not be detected until 3 h after
injection. At this time point, some cells contained punctate structures that contained both PEX16myc and P70R, but a few cells were observed
that contained only PEX16myc (Fig. 10). We have identified human PEX16, and established that an inactivating mutation in this gene abolishes
the synthesis of peroxisomes in a Zellweger syndrome patient, PBD061. These results expand the range of phenotypes and genotypes that are
associated with Zellweger syndrome, and thus, expand our understanding of this lethal disease. However, this study also enhances our
understanding of the molecular events involved in formation of peroxisome membranes. Most importantly, the rescue of peroxisome synthesis in
PBD061 cells by PEX16 expression demonstrates that preexisting peroxisomes, defined here as PMP-containing vesicles, are not required for
the formation of new peroxisomes. While the elucidation of PEX16 function clearly requires additional studies our results do provide some
insight into the biogenesis of peroxisome membranes, at least in humans. Perhaps the simplest model for peroxisome synthesis in rescued
PBD061 cells would be that PEX16 expression allows the synthesis of peroxisomes from phospholipids and PMPs rather than preexisting
vesicles. However, this appears unlikely since there is no precedent for the synthesis of biological membranes other than from a preexisting
lipid bilayer. An alternative hypothesis is that PEX16, either alone or in conjunction with other proteins, converts a preperoxisomal
vesicle to recognizable peroxisomes by mediating the import of other PMPs. This in turn would lead to assembly of the matrix protein import
apparatus, and the subsequent import of peroxisomal matrix proteins, completing the formation of mature peroxisomes. Although this may
explain the formation of peroxisomes during the rescue of PBD061 cells it is questionable whether such a simple model can explain peroxisome
synthesis under all conditions. For instance, if peroxisomes were typically formed by such a process we would expect that the biogenesis of
peroxisomes in PBD061 cells would occur on roughly the same time course as the import of PEX16 into peroxisomes of normal cells. However,
this is clearly not the case as PEX16 is imported into virtually all peroxisomes of normal cells in <2 h whereas the reconstitution of
normal peroxisomes in PBD061 cells requires 18–24 h. Furthermore, this model fails to incorporate roles for the proliferation factors PEX11α
and PEX11β (Schrader et al., 1998) in the formation of peroxisomes. These and other lines of evidence suggested instead that peroxisome
formation may occur by two distinct, yet overlapping pathways (Fig. 11). In this model, peroxisomes would typically form by division of
preexisting peroxisomes in a process mediated by PEX11α and PEX11β, not PEX16. This would explain the hyperabundance of peroxisomes in cells
overexpressing PEX11α or PEX11β, and the fact that overexpression of PEX16 does not induce any detectable proliferation of peroxisomes. In
this model, PEX16 would function normally in importing PMPs into preexisting peroxisomes, and would itself be imported into preexisting
peroxisomes. In the absence of PEX16, PMP import would cease, peroxisomes could not divide, and the organelle would eventually be lost from
the cell population. In addition to this common route of peroxisome formation we propose that PEX16 may, at low efficiency, be targeted to
an unknown preperoxisomal structure. The incorporation of PEX16 into such vesicles may convert them to nascent peroxisomes that are able to
import other PMPs, and eventually to mature peroxisomes. This model would not only explain the ability of PEX16 to rescue PBD061 cells but
would also explain: the presence of a few, large peroxisomes in mutants lacking the PEX11 gene (Erdmann and Blobel, 1995; Marshall et al.,
1995); the peroxisome proliferation promoting activity of PEX11 proteins; and the lack of peroxisome proliferation promoting activity for
PEX16. This model is consistent with virtually all available data on the formation of peroxisomes. However, it proposes the existence of a
structure that has yet to be identified, the preperoxisome, and proposes an activity for PEX16 for which there is no direct evidence, PMP
import. Nevertheless, this model serves as a useful starting point for considering how peroxisomes are formed. The preperoxisomal structure
need not be a dedicated structure awaiting PEX16 for conversion into a nascent peroxisome, only a subcellular vesicle that happens to
incorporate a PEX16 molecule. As for the function of PEX16, our only evidence that this protein is involved in PMP import is the inability
of PBD061 cells to import PMPs into peroxisomes, a phenotype that is also consistent with a defect in the synthesis of the preperoxisomal
structure of our model. Nevertheless, PEX16 has the appropriate structural requirements for a role in PMP import. PEX16 is itself an
integral PMP and extends its NH2 and COOH termini into the cytoplasm where they may facilitate the recognition of PMPs and/or their
insertion into the peroxisome membrane. In addition, PEX16 appears to be transported efficiently to peroxisomes, and is detected only in
peroxisomes, not some other compartment, at steady state. It should be noted that similar models have been proposed that implicate the ER as
the source of the preperoxisomal structure (Kunau and Erdmann, 1998; Titorenko and Rachubinski, 1998a). However, our data do not provide
evidence for a role of the ER in peroxisome biogenesis. In addition to improving our understanding of peroxisome synthesis and the molecular
basis of Zellweger syndrome, this report also makes clear that homologues of the same peroxisome biogenesis factor may have disparate roles
in different organisms. Although we identified human PEX16 by its sequence similarity to Y. lipolytica PEX16, there were significant
differences between these proteins. Prior reports have established that YlPEX16 is peripherally associated with the inner face of the
peroxisome membrane, and transported to peroxisomes via the ER in a PEX1- and PEX6-dependent manner. Despite it playing a role in the import
of a subset of peroxisomal matrix proteins, YlPEX16 is not required for synthesis of peroxisome membranes nor PMP import (Eitzen et al.,
1997; Titorenko et al., 1997; Titorenko and Rachubinski, 1998b). In contrast, human PEX16, an integral PMP with its NH2 and COOH termini
exposed to the cytoplasm, is required for PMP import and peroxisome synthesis, and appears to traffic from the cytoplasm to the peroxisome
in a PEX1-independent manner. These differences emphasize the need for caution in extrapolating the functions of a particular peroxisome
biogenesis factor to its homologue in divergent species. Discretion in this matter is emphasized further by the fact that the Saccharomyces
cerevisiae genome lacks a PEX16 homologue, even though the YlPEX16 and human PEX16 proteins share 24% amino acid identity. The CG9 cell line
lacks detectable peroxisomes. Human fibroblasts from representatives of nine different complementation groups of the PBDs were processed for
indirect immunofluorescence using rabbit antibodies specific for PMP70, and Texas red–labeled goat anti–rabbit IgG secondary antibodies.
Numerous peroxisomal structures were detected in (A) the PEX1-deficient CG1 cell line, PBD009; (B) the PEX5-deficient CG2 cell line, PBD005;
(C) the PEX12-deficient CG3 cell line, PBD097; (D) the PEX6-deficient CG4 cell line, PBD105; (E) the PEX10-deficient CG7 cell line, PBD100;
(F) the CG8 cell line, PBD109; (G) the PEX2-deficient CG10 cell line, PBD094; and (H) the CG13 cell line, PBD222. In contrast, (I) the CG9
cell line, PBD061, lacks detectable peroxisomes. Bar, 10 μm. The PMP import defect of CG9 cells applies to numerous PMPs. The CG9 cell line,
PBD061 (A–C); and the CG10 cell line, PBD094 (D–F), were transfected with vectors designed to express PMP70 myc (A and D), PEX12myc (B and
E), and PMP32myc (C and F). 2 d after transfection the cells were processed for indirect immunofluorescence using antibodies specific for
the myc tag. The peroxisomal nature of the punctate structures in PBD094 cells was confirmed by double label experiments with peroxisomal
membrane markers (data not shown). Bar, 10 μm. Different fates for different PMPs in PBD061 cells. Total cellular protein was extracted from
the CG9 cell line, PBD061, and the CG10 cell line, PBD094. Equal amounts of each lysate (by protein) were separated by SDS-PAGE, and blotted
with antibodies specific for the PMPs PMP70 (A), P70R (B); and PEX14 (C). In addition, total cellular protein was extracted from PBD061 and
PBD094 cells that had been transfected with the PEX12myc expression vector. Equal amounts of each lysate (by protein) were separated by SDS-
PAGE, and blotted with antibodies specific for the myc epotope tag (D). PEX16 expression restores peroxisome synthesis in the CG9 cell line,
PBD061. (A) The deduced amino acid sequence of human PEX16. Amino acid positions are noted on the left and the two predicted transmembrane
domains are underlined. PBD061 cells were transfected with the plasmids pcDNA3 (B and D), and pcDNA3-PEX16 (C and E). 3 d later the cells
were processed for indirect immunofluorescence using rabbit antibodies specific for PMP70 (B and C), and sheep antibodies specific for
catalase (D and E), followed by fluorescein-labeled goat anti– rabbit and Texas red–labeled goat anti–sheep secondary antibodies. Note the
colocalization of PMP70 and catalase in the rescued cell (C and E). Bar, 10 μm. PBD061 cells have an inactivating mutation in PEX16. Direct
sequence analysis of a PEX16 fragment from (A) PBD061 and (B) an unaffected individual showing the CGA to TGA nonsense mutation in PBD061
genomic DNA. The homogeneous nature of the PBD061 sequence indicates that this patient is homozygous for the R176ter mutation. The effect of
this mutation was assayed by transfecting PBD061 cells with pcDNA3-PEX16/ R176ter (C and D) a plasmid designed to express the mutated form
of the cDNA; and pcDNA3-PEX16 (E and F). 2 d after transfection the cells were processed for indirect immunofluorescence using rabbit
antibodies specific for PMP70 (C and E) and sheep antibodies specific for catalase (D and F), followed by fluorescein-labeled goat
anti–rabbit and Texas red–labeled goat anti– sheep secondary antibodies. Bar, 10 μm. PEX16 encodes an integral peroxisomal membrane protein.
(A) A postnuclear supernatant of HepG2 cells was fractionated by density gradient centrifugation. Equal proportions of each fraction were
assayed for the marker enzymes catalase, a peroxisomal enzyme, SDH, a mitochondrial marker, and NCR, an ER-associated enzyme. Equal
proportions of each fraction were also assayed for levels of PEX16 by immunoblot (bottom). These antibodies also detect an unknown protein
of slightly higher mobility in fraction 10. (B) PEX16 is present in high pH carbonate-washed membranes. A light mitochondrial fraction from
HepG2 cells was separated into a hypotonic extraction supernatant (lane 1); a high salt extraction supernatant (lane 2); a high pH carbonate
supernatant (lane 3); and a pellet of carbonate-washed membranes (lane 4). Equal proportions of each fraction were separated by SDS-PAGE and
assayed for levels of PEX16 by Western blot. (C) Protease protection experiments indicate that PEX16 spans the membrane twice with its NH2
and COOH termini exposed to the cytoplasm. A light mitochondrial fraction was prepared from HepG2 cells and incubated with no trypsin (lane
1), 15 μg trypsin (lane 2), 30 μg trypsin (lane 3), and 60 μg trypsin (lane 4). PEX16 is reduced to a protease-resistant form of 15 kD, the
size of the two transmembrane domains and the intermembrane loop. Digestion in the presence of detergent (1% Triton X-100) did not yield the
15-kD species (data not shown). The NH2 and COOH termini of PEX16 are exposed to the cytoplasm. Normal human fibroblasts were transfected
with pcDNA3-mycPEX16 (A–D) or pcDNA3-PEX16myc (E–H). 2 d after transfection cells were fixed and processed for indirect immunofluorescence
under standard permeabilization conditions (A, B, E, and F) or under differential permeabilization conditions (C, D, G, and H). Cells were
labeled with mouse mAbs specific for the myc epitope tag (A, C, E, and G) and with sheep antibodies specific for catalase (B, D, F, and H),
followed by Texas red–labeled goat anti–mouse and fluorescein-labeled goat anti–sheep secondary antibodies. Bar, 10 μm. PEX16 is rapidly
targeted to peroxisomes in a PEX1-independent and BFA-independent manner. The PEX1-deficient cell line, PBD009, was transfected with
pcDNA3-PEX16myc (A and B), and processed for indirect immunofluorescence 2 d later using mouse mAbs specific for the myc epitope tag (A),
and rabbit antibodies specific for PMP70 (B), followed by fluorescein- labeled goat anti–mouse and Texas red–labeled goat anti–rabbit
secondary antibodies. The normal human fibroblast cell line, 5756T, was injected with pcDNA3-PEX16myc and processed for indirect
immunofluorescence 2 h later using mouse mAbs specific for the myc epitope tag (C) and rabbit antibodies specific for P70R (D), followed by
fluorescein-labeled goat anti–mouse and Texas red–labeled goat anti–rabbit secondary antibodies. (E and F) 5756T cells that had been
pretreated for 30 min with 10 μg/ml BFA were injected with pcDNA3-PEX16myc, incubated for 2 h in 10 μg/ml BFA, and processed for
immunofluorescence using mouse mAbs specific for the myc epitope tag (E) and rabbit antibodies specific for P70R (F), followed by
fluorescein-labeled goat anti–mouse and Texas red–labeled goat anti–rabbit secondary antibodies. Bar, 10 μm. Rescue of peroxisome synthesis
in PBD061 cells occurs in a multistep process. PBD061 cells were injected with pcDNA3- PEX16 and processed for indirect immunofluorescence 3
h later using rabbit antibodies specific for P70R (A); and sheep antibodies specific for catalase (B); followed by fluorescein-labeled goat
anti– rabbit and Texas red–labeled goat anti–sheep secondary antibodies. Note that many of the peroxisomes appeared to be undergoing
elongation, the first step in PEX11β-mediated peroxisome proliferation (Schrader et al., 1998). Cells processed for 22 h (C and D) and 72 h
(E and F) after introduction of pcDNA3- PEX16 were also processed for indirect immunofluorescence using rabbit antibodies specific for P70R
(C and E) and sheep antibodies specific for catalase (D and F), followed by fluorescein-labeled goat anti–rabbit and Texas red–labeled goat
anti–sheep secondary antibodies. (G and H) PBD061 cells were preincubated for 30 min with 10 μg/ml BFA, injected with pcDNA3-PEX16, and
incubated in 10 μg/ml BFA for 30 h. These cells were processed for immunofluorescence using rabbit antibodies specific for P70R (G); and
sheep antibodies specific for catalase (H); followed by fluorescein-labeled goat anti– rabbit and Texas red–labeled goat anti–sheep
secondary antibodies. Bar, 10 μm. Import of PEX16myc can precede P70R import in peroxisomes of rescued PBD061 cells. PBD061 cells were
injected with pcDNA3-PEX16myc and processed for indirect immunofluorescence 3 h later using mouse mAbs specific for the myc epitope tag (A
and C) and rabbit antibodies specific for P70R (B and D), followed by fluorescein-labeled goat anti– mouse and Texas red–labeled goat
anti–sheep secondary antibodies. Bar, 10 μm. A model of peroxisome biogenesis in the absence (top) and presence (bottom) of preexisting
peroxisomes. During rescue of PBD061 cells, PEX16 creates nascent peroxisomes, possibly from a preperoxisomal vesicle. These nascent
PEX16-containing peroxisomes then import additional PMPs. The import of PEX11 proteins allows these structures to proliferate by fission or
by budding, and the import of other peroxins leads to formation of a functional matrix protein import apparatus. Under normal conditions,
peroxisomes would form primarily from preexisting peroxisomes in a PEX11-mediated process. Although the targeting of PEX16 to preperoxisomal
structures may be enhanced in the absence of peroxisomal membranes, such a process may also occur under normal conditions. We thank Ann and
Hugo Moser for the generous gift of most PBD cell lines, Ron Wanders for the gift of the CG13 cell line, PBD222, Barbara Biery and Dave
Valle for the gift of the PMP32myc expression vector, Gerardo Jimenez-Sanchez and Dave Valle for the anti-PMP70 antibodies, Wilhelm Just for
the anti-P70R antibodies, and Stephanie Mihalik and Paul Watkins for HepG2 cell fractions. We also thank Chia-Che Chang for some of the data
in Fig. 1, and the members of our laboratory for helpful comments during the course of this work. These studies were supported by National
Institutes of Health grants to S.J. Gould (DK45787 and HD10981). S. South was supported by the Predoctoral Training Program in Human
Genetics of The Johns Hopkins University. Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline peroxisome biogenesis disorders peroxisomal membrane protein
Address correspondence to Dr. Stephen J. Gould, The Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205. Tel.: (410) 955-3085 ext. 3424. Fax: (410) 955-0215. E-mail: Stephen.Gould@qmail.bs.jhu.edu
